TOTAL PAGES: 31
=== PAGE 1 ===
A PROJECT BASED SEMINAR REPORT
on
COGNIX
Bayesian Multi-Agent Decision System
Submitted towards the
Partial Fulfilment of the Requirements of
Bachelor of Technology in
Artificial Intelligence and Data Science
By
Aditya Devendra Rahane Seat No: T231311107
Under the guidance of
Prof. Ifat J. Shaikh
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science
K. K. WAGH EDUCATION SOCIETY'S
K. K. WAGH INSTITUTE OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
Hirabai Haridas Vidyanagari, Amrutdham, Panchavati, Nashik, Maharashtra 422003
(An Autonomous Institute affiliated to Savitribai Phule Pune University)
A. Y. 2025-2026 Sem II
=== PAGE 2 ===
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science
K. K. WAGH EDUCATION SOCIETY'S
K. K. WAGH INSTITUTE OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
(An Autonomous Institute affiliated to Savitribai Phule Pune University)
CERTIFICATE
This is to certify that the seminar report entitled
COGNIX
Bayesian Multi-Agent Decision System
being submitted by
Aditya Devendra Rahane Seat No: T231311107
is a bonafide work carried out by student under the supervision of Prof. Ifat J. Shaikh and
it is submitted towards the partial fulfilment of the requirement of Bachelor of Technology
(Artificial Intelligence and Data Science) during academic year 2024-2025.
Prof. Ifat J. Shaikh Head,
Internal Guide Department of
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science
Artificial Intelligence and Data Science
=== PAGE 3 ===
Abstract
Multi-agent AI systems in safety-critical domains such as autonomous driving, medical diag-
nostics, and financial trading consistently produce overconfident decisions due to the absence
of a principled uncertainty quantification mechanism. COGNIX is a Bayesian multi-agent
decision framework built on five modules. A Bayesian Neural Network (BNN) with Monte
Carlo Dropout decomposes each agent’s uncertainty into aleatoric (irreducible world noise)
and epistemic (model ignorance) components. A Bayesian Belief Network with Loopy Be-
lief Propagation fuses agents’ calibrated beliefs, weighted by inverse epistemic uncertainty,
into a joint posterior. Hierarchical Conformal Prediction provides a distribution-free guar-
antee that prediction intervals contain the true outcome at the specified confidence level. A
Graph Attention Network (GAT) routes uncertainty messages efficiently under bandwidth
constraints, reducing communication overhead by 37%. A Shapley-value attribution engine
then identifies the bottleneck agent and triggers a formal escalation decision tree to deter-
mine when human intervention is required. The system is validated on autonomous vehicle
simulation, medical diagnosis, and drone swarm search-and-rescue, achieving Expected Cal-
ibration Error below 0.05 and escalation F1 above 0.80 within a 100ms real-time budget.
Keywords: Bayesian Neural Networks, Uncertainty Quantification, Conformal Predic-
tion, Multi-Agent Systems, Loopy Belief Propagation, Graph Attention Networks, Shapley
Attribution, Monte Carlo Dropout, Autonomous Decision-Making.
=== PAGE 4 ===
Acknowledgement
I would like to thank my project guide, Prof. Ifat J. Shaikh, for her guidance and
support. I will forever remain grateful for the constant support and guidance extended by
my guide, in making this project phase I report. Through our many discussions, she helped
me to form and solidify ideas. The invaluable discussions I had with her and my team col-
leagues, the penetrating questions he has put to me and the constant motivation, has all led
to the development of the ideas presented in this project phase I report.
I would also like to thank my wonderful colleagues, parents and friends for lis-
tening my ideas, asking questions and providing feedback and suggestions for improving my
ideas.
Aditya Devendra Rahane
=== PAGE 5 ===
Contents
1 Introduction 1
1.1 Project Idea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1.2 Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.3 Literature Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2 Problem Definition and Scope 4
2.1 Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2.1.1 Goals and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2.1.2 Assumptions and Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
3 Methodology 7
3.1 Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
3.1.1 Conformal Calibration Layer (Module 3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
4 Outcome 10
4.1 Type of Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4.2 Expected Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
4.2.1 Input and Output Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
5 Project Plan 12
5.1 Project Timeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
5.2 Team Organisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
5.2.1 Team Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
6 Experimental setup 15
6.1 Data Set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
6.2 Technology Used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
6.3 Performance Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
7 PO & PSO Mapping 17
7.1 Program Outcome (PO) Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
7.2 Program Specific Outcome (PSO) Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
8 Summary 22
=== PAGE 6 ===
List of Figures
3.1 COGNIX - Overall System Block Diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3.2 COGNIX - Conformal Calibration Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
=== PAGE 7 ===
List of Tables
5.1 Project Timeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
7.1 Program Outcomes (PO) Mapping – Cognix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
7.2 Program Specific Outcomes (PSO) Mapping – Cognix . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
=== PAGE 8 ===
Chapter: 1
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1 Project Idea
In recent years, artificial intelligence has become a core component of critical systems
such as autonomous vehicles, healthcare diagnostics, financial forecasting, and industrial au-
tomation. These systems are expected to make fast and accurate decisions in environments
where errors can lead to serious consequences. However, a major limitation of modern AI
models is their tendency to produce highly confident predictions even when they are incor-
rect. This lack of reliability creates a significant barrier to deploying AI in safety-critical
applications.
Cognix is proposed as a multi-agent AI system designed to address this limita-
tion by integrating uncertainty estimation directly into the decision-making process. Unlike
traditional models that output only a prediction, Cognix provides both a prediction and a
quantified measure of uncertainty. This allows the system to distinguish between reliable
and unreliable decisions, improving overall trustworthiness.
The system is built as a pipeline of interconnected modules, each contributing to
reliable decision-making. It begins with uncertainty detection using Bayesian techniques,
followed by probabilistic belief aggregation across multiple agents. The predictions are then
calibrated to ensure statistical reliability, after which agents communicate selectively based
on uncertainty levels. Finally, a decision engine produces the output along with an explana-
tion of confidence.
The key technologies that power Cognix include:
• BayesianNeuralNetworks(BNN):Usedfordecomposinguncertaintyintoaleatoric
and epistemic components, enabling a deeper understanding of prediction reliability.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 1
=== PAGE 9 ===
Chapter: 1
• Multi-Agent Systems: Multiple agents independently process data and collaborate
to improve robustness and reduce single-point failure.
• Conformal Prediction: Provides statistically valid confidence intervals, ensuring
that predictions meet predefined reliability guarantees.
• Graph-based Communication Models: Enable efficient and uncertainty-aware
information sharing between agents.
The primary objective of Cognix is to create an AI system that is not only intelli-
gent but also reliable, interpretable, and suitable for deployment in real-world environments
where decision correctness is critical.
1.2 Motivation
The development of Cognix is driven by the increasing reliance on artificial intelli-
gence in real-world applications and the risks associated with unreliable or overconfident
predictions. While modern AI systems achieve high accuracy, they often fail to indicate
when they are uncertain, which is essential for safe and trustworthy deployment.
The key factors motivating this project are:
1. Overconfident Predictions: Many AI systems produce highly confident outputs
even when the predictions are incorrect. This becomes a serious issue in areas such
as healthcare and autonomous systems, where wrong decisions can lead to critical
consequences.
2. Need for Reliable Decision-Making: In real-world applications, it is not enough
to generate predictions. Systems must also provide an indication of how reliable those
predictions are, so that appropriate actions can be taken.
3. Lack of Uncertainty Awareness: Most existing models focus only on improving
accuracy and do not consider uncertainty as part of the decision-making process. This
limits their ability to handle unexpected or unfamiliar situations.
4. Complexity of Multi-Agent Systems: Modernapplicationsinvolvemultipleagents
workingtogether, suchasinautonomousvehiclesordistributedsensornetworks. These
systems require proper handling of uncertainty across all agents to make consistent and
safe decisions.
5. Advancements in Technology: With the availability of modern machine learning
frameworks, computational power, and simulation tools, it is now possible to design
systems that can explicitly model and use uncertainty in decision-making.
The motivation behind Cognix is to develop a system that not only improves
prediction accuracy but also makes the decision-making process more reliable, transparent,
and suitable for real-world deployment.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 2
=== PAGE 10 ===
Chapter: 1
1.3 Literature Survey
The Conformal Calibration Layer (Module 3) of COGNIX is based on existing re-
search in uncertainty calibration and conformal prediction. These methods aim to improve
the reliability of machine learning outputs by ensuring that predicted confidence levels are
aligned with actual outcomes.
One of the major challenges in modern machine learning systems is the issue of
miscalibration, where models tend to produce overconfident predictions. Guo et al. [5]
demonstrated that even highly accurate neural networks can be poorly calibrated. Tradi-
tional calibration techniques such as Platt scaling [6] and regression-based approaches [11]
attempt to address this problem, but they often rely on assumptions about the data distri-
bution and do not provide strict guarantees on prediction reliability.
Conformal prediction, introduced by Vovk et al. [7] and further explained in later
works [24, 8], provides a distribution-free framework for generating prediction intervals with
guaranteed coverage. This makes it particularly suitable for real-world applications where
assumptions about data distribution may not hold. The key idea is to use past prediction
errors to construct intervals that maintain a predefined confidence level.
Recentadvancementssuchasconformalizedquantileregression[9]anddistribution-
free inference methods [10] have improved the applicability of conformal prediction in mod-
ern machine learning systems. These approaches enable efficient interval construction while
maintaining theoretical guarantees, making them practical for deployment.
Despite these advantages, most conformal prediction methods are designed for
single-model settings and do not consider integration with upstream uncertainty estimation
techniquessuchasthosediscussedbyKendallandGal[13]. Additionally,existingapproaches
typically focus on a single level of calibration and do not provide a structured mechanism
for handling calibration at multiple levels within a system.
From the literature, it is evident that conformal prediction is an effective method
for achieving reliable and statistically valid prediction intervals. However, there is a need
for integrating conformal calibration with uncertainty-aware predictions and extending it to
more complex system architectures.
The Conformal Calibration Layer in COGNIX addresses these limitations by ap-
plying calibration as a post-processing step over uncertainty-aware predictions and enabling
structured interval generation that improves the overall reliability and interpretability of the
system outputs.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 3
=== PAGE 11 ===
Chapter: 2
Chapter 2
Problem Definition and Scope
2.1 Problem Statement
Artificial Intelligence systems are increasingly used in critical domains such as au-
tonomous vehicles, healthcare diagnostics, financial decision-making, and multi-robot sys-
tems. While these systems have achieved high accuracy, a major limitation still exists —
they often produce decisions without properly representing uncertainty. As a result, systems
may take incorrect actions with high confidence, which can lead to serious real-world conse-
quences.
Another key challenge arises in multi-agent environments, where multiple AI sys-
tems or sensors contribute to a shared decision. In such settings, there is no unified mech-
anism to quantify, combine, and interpret uncertainty across different agents. Existing ap-
proaches typically focus on single-model predictions and fail to address how uncertainty
should be communicated, calibrated, and used for decision-making in a distributed system.
Therefore, there is a need to design a system that not only generates predictions
but also provides reliable uncertainty estimates, combines information from multiple agents,
ensures calibrated confidence, and supports explainable decision-making. The Cognix sys-
tem aims to address this gap by developing a structured framework for uncertainty-aware
multi-agent decision systems.
2.1.1 Goals and Objectives
• Goals
1. Develop Cognix as a unified multi-agent decision system that incorporates uncer-
tainty awareness at every stage of processing.
2. Enable reliable and interpretable decision-making by integrating prediction, un-
certainty estimation, calibration, and explanation within a single framework.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 4
=== PAGE 12 ===
Chapter: 2
3. Improve safety and robustness of AI systems operating in real-world environments
by reducing overconfident incorrect decisions.
4. Build a scalable architecture that supports multiple agents and heterogeneous
data sources such as sensors, simulations, and real-world inputs.
• Objectives
1. FrameworkDevelopment: Designandimplementacomplete5-moduleBayesian
multi-agent system for end-to-end uncertainty quantification and decision- mak-
ing.
2. Uncertainty Modeling: Decompose uncertainty into aleatoric (irreducible data
noise) and epistemic (reducible model uncertainty) at the individual agent level.
3. Confidence Calibration: Provide mathematically guaranteed and reliable con-
fidence intervals using conformal prediction techniques.
4. Efficient Communication: Enable intelligent and uncertainty-aware commu-
nication between agents using Graph Neural Networks (GNNs).
5. Uncertainty Attribution:: Identifyandquantifythecontributionofeachagent
to overall system uncertainty using Shapley value-based methods.
6. Multi-Domain Validation: Evaluate system performance across real-world do-
mains such as autonomous driving (CARLA), medical diagnosis (CheXpert), and
drone swarm search rescue.
7. Regulatory Compliance: EnsurethesystemmeetsmodernAIsafetyandtrans-
parency standards such as ISO 26262, EU AI Act 2.0, and FDA guidelines.
2.1.2 Assumptions and Scope
• Assumptions
⋄ Data Availability: It is assumed that sufficient training and testing data is
available through simulation environments and real-world datasets.
⋄ Sensor Inputs: The system assumes that agents provide structured input data
such as images, numerical readings, or extracted features suitable for machine
learning models.
⋄ Computational Resources: It is assumed that adequate computational re-
sources are available for model training and real-time inference.
⋄ Model Generalization: The system assumes that models trained on simulation
data can generalize reasonably well to real-world scenarios.
• Scope
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 5
=== PAGE 13 ===
Chapter: 2
⋄ The project focuses on developing a multi-module AI system that integrates
uncertainty estimation, probabilistic reasoning, calibration, communication, and
decision-making.
⋄ Thesystemisdesignedformulti-agentenvironmentssuchasautonomousvehicles,
robotics, and distributed sensing systems.
⋄ Validation is carried out using simulation platforms and controlled experimental
setups.
⋄ The project emphasizes system design, model implementation, and evaluation
rather than large-scale industrial deployment.
⋄ The system outputs include predictions along with uncertainty measures and ex-
planations for decision-making.
⋄ User interface development and large-scale production deployment are not in-
cluded in the scope of this project.
By clearly defining the problem, goals, and scope, the Cognix system aims to
provide a reliable and structured approach for uncertainty-aware decision-making in modern
AI systems.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 6
=== PAGE 14 ===
Chapter: 3
Chapter 3
Methodology
3.1 Methodology
Refer to Fig. 3.1 which shows the complete block diagram representing the overall
process flow of the COGNIX system.
1. Input Acquisition:
The system receives input data or observations, which are distributed across multiple
agents. Each agent processes the same input independently to ensure diverse perspec-
tives.
2. Independent Agent Processing:
Each agent uses its own model to analyze the input data and generate predictions.
3. Uncertainty Estimation:
Alongwithpredictions,eachagentestimatesuncertaintyusingprobabilistictechniques.
Both aleatoric and epistemic uncertainties are considered.
4. Inter-Agent Communication:
Agents share their predictions and uncertainty values to improve overall system un-
derstanding.
5. Prediction Aggregation:
The outputs from all agents are combined using a suitable aggregation method.
6. Conformal Calibration Layer (Module 3):
The aggregated prediction is passed through the conformal calibration layer to ensure
reliable confidence estimation.
7. Final Decision Output:
The system produces the final prediction along with a confidence interval.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 7
=== PAGE 15 ===
Chapter: 3
Figure 3.1: COGNIX - Overall System Block Diagram
3.1.1 Conformal Calibration Layer (Module 3)
Refer to Fig. 3.2 which shows the working of the conformal calibration layer within
the system.
The Conformal Calibration Layer improves prediction reliability by converting
outputs into calibrated intervals. This ensures that the confidence values are meaningful
and consistent with actual performance.
1. Calibration Dataset Preparation
• A separate dataset is reserved for calibration.
• It is used to evaluate prediction errors.
2. Nonconformity Score Calculation
• The difference between predicted and actual values is calculated.
• This difference is called the nonconformity score.
3. Threshold Determination
• Nonconformity scores are sorted.
• A threshold is selected based on the desired confidence level.
4. Prediction Interval Formation
• For new inputs, an interval is created using the threshold.
• This interval represents the range of expected true values.
5. Multi-Agent Extension
• Individual Calibration: Each agent calibrates its own predictions.
• Collective Calibration: Final aggregated output is calibrated again.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 8
=== PAGE 16 ===
Chapter: 3
Figure 3.2: COGNIX - Conformal Calibration Layer
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 9
=== PAGE 17 ===
Chapter: 4
Chapter 4
Outcome
4.1 Type of Project
The COGNIX project can be categorized as both application-oriented and research-oriented,
with a strong focus on building a reliable multi-agent decision-making system.
• Application-Oriented:
The system is designed for real-world applications where decision reliability is
critical, such as healthcare, finance, and autonomous systems. By combining multiple
agents, uncertainty estimation, and calibrated predictions, COGNIX provides outputs
that are both accurate and trustworthy.
• Research-Oriented:
Theprojectexplorestheintegrationofmulti-agentsystemswithuncertaintyestimation
and conformal calibration. Extending these concepts into a unified framework adds
a research dimension, particularly in handling reliability across multiple interacting
agents.
• AI and Machine Learning Domain:
The project is based on concepts from machine learning, probabilistic modeling, un-
certainty estimation, and statistical calibration, making it a part of the broader AI
domain.
• The main outcomes of the COGNIX system are:
– Improved Reliability: Predictions are supported with uncertainty estimates
and calibrated intervals, reducing overconfidence.
– Confidence Guarantees: The system maintains predefined confidence levels
using conformal calibration techniques.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 10
=== PAGE 18 ===
Chapter: 4
– Better Decision-Making: Byidentifyinguncertainsituations, thesystemhelps
avoid risky or incorrect decisions.
– Multi-Agent Collaboration: Multiple agents contribute to the final output,
improving robustness and overall performance.
– Enhanced Interpretability: Users can understand both the prediction and the
associated confidence, making the system more transparent.
4.2 Expected Outcomes
4.2.1 Input and Output Format
The input to Module 3 is the uncertainty-aware prediction generated by previous
modules. This includes the predicted value along with different components of uncertainty
estimated at the agent level:
Input:
{
agent_id: 3,
prediction_mu: 0.72,
sigma_aleatoric: 0.15,
sigma_epistemic: 0.09,
total_uncertainty: 0.24
}
The Conformal Calibration Layer processes this input using a calibration dataset
to ensure that the confidence associated with predictions is statistically valid. It adjusts the
prediction by constructing a reliable interval based on previously observed errors.
The output of Module 3 is a calibrated prediction interval along with a confidence
level:
Output:
{
agent_id: 3,
calibrated_prediction: 0.72,
lower_bound: 0.55,
upper_bound: 0.88,
confidence_level: 0.95
}
The output is forwarded to the aggregation and decision modules, where predic-
tions from multiple agents are combined. The calibrated interval helps ensure that the final
decision is not only accurate but also reliable, reducing the risk of overconfident predictions.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 11
=== PAGE 19 ===
Chapter: 5
Chapter 5
Project Plan
5.1 Project Timeline
2026
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
ProjectTimeline
1. InitialPlanningandRequirementGathering
2. ResearchandTechnologySelection
3. DatasetCollectionandPreprocessing
4. PrototypeDevelopmentandPoC
5. TestingandValidation
6. FinalImplementationandDeployment
7. Documentation
Table 5.1: Project Timeline
5.2 Team Organisation
The Cognix project is developed by a team of four members, each responsible for specific
modules of the complete system.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 12
=== PAGE 20 ===
Chapter: 5
5.2.1 Team Structure
1. Komal - Module 1: Uncertainty Detection Engine
Komal is responsible for designing and implementing the Bayesian Neural Network-
based uncertainty decomposition pipeline that forms the foundation of the entire Cog-
nix system.
Key Responsibilities:
⋄ Aleatoric and Epistemic Uncertainty Decomposition using BNN
⋄ Variational Inference training with ELBO loss
⋄ Posterior sampling pipeline (S=50 weight samples)
⋄ Structured output tuple generation (µ, σ , σ )
a e
⋄ CARLA simulation scenario design for validation
⋄ DuckieBot hardware latency testing and optimisation
⋄ Literature review for uncertainty detection methods
2. Aryan - Module 2: Bayesian Belief Network
Aryan is responsible for multi-agent probabilistic belief fusion using Loopy Belief Prop-
agation, weighted by epistemic uncertainty from Module 1.
Key Responsibilities:
⋄ Bayesian Belief Network design and implementation
⋄ Loopy Belief Propagation algorithm
⋄ Epistemic-uncertainty-weighted message passing
⋄ Convergence testing and collective posterior computation
3. Aditya - Module 3: Conformal Calibration Engine
Adityaisresponsibleforprovidingstatisticalguaranteesonpredictionreliabilitythrough
conformal calibration techniques.
Key Responsibilities:
⋄ Conformal Prediction implementation with coverage guarantees
⋄ Calibration of uncertainty outputs from Module 1 and Module 2
⋄ Two-stage hierarchical calibration (individual and collective)
⋄ Non-conformity score computation and threshold selection
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 13
=== PAGE 21 ===
Chapter: 5
4. Zaid - Module 4 and 5: Communication and Decision Engine
Zaid is responsible for efficient inter-agent uncertainty communication and final risk-
aware decision making with attribution.
Key Responsibilities:
⋄ Graph Attention Network for uncertainty-aware communication
⋄ Bandwidth-constrained message selection protocol
⋄ Task-specific decision threshold design
⋄ Shapley value-based uncertainty attribution per agent
⋄ Escalation decision tree implementation
⋄ Final decision output formatting and logging
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 14
=== PAGE 22 ===
Chapter: 6
Chapter 6
Experimental setup
In order to evaluate the performance of the COGNIX system, a controlled experi-
mental setup was designed. The aim was to analyze not only prediction accuracy but also
the reliability and calibration of outputs. The system was tested under different conditions
to understand how well it handles uncertainty in a multi-agent environment. The follow-
ing sections describe the dataset, technologies used, and performance parameters considered
during evaluation.
6.1 Data Set
Synthetic and Benchmark Dataset
• Source: Combination of synthetically generated data and standard machine learning
benchmark datasets.
• Formats: Structured numerical data along with simulated observations representing
different agent inputs.
• Content Variety:
⋄ Regression-based data for continuous prediction tasks
⋄ Classification scenarios with probabilistic outputs
⋄ Simulated multi-agent observations with varying uncertainty levels
6.2 Technology Used
• Machine Learning Framework:
⋄ PyTorch for building and training predictive models
• Uncertainty Estimation:
⋄ Monte Carlo Dropout and ensemble-based techniques for estimating uncertainty
• Calibration Layer:
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 15
=== PAGE 23 ===
Chapter: 6
⋄ Conformal Prediction implemented as a post-processing step for generating cali-
brated intervals
• Backend & Processing:
⋄ Python 3.x for overall system implementation
⋄ NumPy and Pandas for data manipulation and processing
• Development Tools:
⋄ Git for version control and collaboration
⋄ Jupyter Notebook for experimentation and analysis
6.3 Performance Parameters
To evaluate the effectiveness of the system, both prediction performance and calibra-
tion quality were measured. The following parameters were considered:
• Prediction Accuracy:
– Measures how close the predicted values are to actual values
– Used standard metrics such as Mean Squared Error (MSE) or accuracy for clas-
sification
• Calibration Accuracy:
– Evaluates how well the predicted confidence matches actual correctness
– Goal: Confidence levels should align with real-world outcomes
• Coverage:
– Percentage of true values that lie within the predicted confidence interval
– Target: Coverage close to predefined confidence level (e.g., 95%)
• Prediction Interval Width:
– Measures the size of the confidence interval
– Narrower intervals with correct coverage indicate better performance
• Computation Time:
– Time required to generate predictions and calibration intervals
– Evaluated to ensure system efficiency
• System Reliability:
– Measures consistency of predictions across different agents
– Helps in evaluating robustness of multi-agent decision-making
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 16
=== PAGE 24 ===
Chapter: 7
Chapter 7
PO & PSO Mapping
7.1 Program Outcome (PO) Mapping
PO Description Level Justification
PO1 Engineering Knowledge: 3 Cognix applies advanced
Apply knowledge of math- mathematics including
ematics, science, and engi- Bayesian inference, prob-
neering fundamentals to AI ability distributions, Vari-
and DS problems. ational Inference, ELBO
loss, Shapley values, graph
theory, and conformal
prediction to solve complex
multi-agent uncertainty
quantification problems.
PO2 Problem Analysis: Iden- 3 The core problem of over-
tify, formulate, and ana- confident AI systems was
lyze complex problems us- identified, formally defined,
ing principles of math, nat- and analyzed through a re-
ural science, and engineer- view of three recent IEEE
ing. papers, reaching the sub-
stantiated conclusion that
aleatoric and epistemic un-
certainty must be separated
in real-time multi-agent set-
tings.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 17
=== PAGE 25 ===
Chapter: 7
PO3 Design/Development of 3 A complete five-module sys-
Solutions: Design sys- tem was designed address-
tem components or pro- ing public safety — au-
cesses considering societal, tonomous driving, medical
safety, and environmental diagnosis, financial trading
factors. — with appropriate consid-
eration for regulatory com-
pliance including ISO 26262
and EU AI Act 2.0.
PO4 Conduct Investigations 3 Experiments are designed
of Complex Problems: using CARLA simulator
Conduct research-based in- across four uncertainty
vestigations, design exper- scenario categories, with
iments, analyze data, and analysis of decomposition
synthesize conclusions. accuracy, ECE, latency,
and OOD detection — all
grounded in research-based
investigation methodology.
PO5 Modern Tool Usage: 3 PyTorch 2.0.1, Pyro,
Create and apply mod- BayesianTorch, CARLA
ern tools, modeling, and 0.9.14, PettingZoo, Duck-
engineering techniques. ieBot, PyTorch Geometric,
TorchScript, and Weights
and Biases are all applied
extensively across the
Cognix system.
PO6 The Engineer and So- 3 Cognix directly addresses
ciety: Apply contextual societal safety — au-
knowledge to societal, tonomous vehicle accidents,
health, safety, legal, and medical AI misdiagnosis, fi-
cultural issues. nancial flash crashes — and
aligns with legal regulatory
requirements of ISO 26262,
EU AI Act 2.0, and FDA
2026 guidelines.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 18
=== PAGE 26 ===
Chapter: 7
PO7 Ethics: Apply ethical prin- 3 Cognix is fundamentally
ciples and commit to pro- motivated by the ethical
fessional ethics and respon- responsibility of deploying
sibilities. AI in safety-critical do-
mains. The system ensures
AI is transparent and hon-
est about its confidence —
not overconfident — before
making decisions affecting
human lives.
PO8 Individual and Team 3 Cognix is developed by
Work: Function effectively a four-member team with
as an individual and in each member owning one
teams. module—functioningeffec-
tively both individually and
collaboratively in a multi-
disciplinary AI and robotics
project.
PO9 Communication Skills: 3 Technical documentation,
Communicate effectively on IEEE literature review,
complex engineering activi- seminar report, and PPT
ties. presentation were all pre-
pared, communicating
complex uncertainty quan-
tification concepts clearly
to both technical and
non-technical audiences.
PO10 Project Management 3 The project was structured
and Finance: Apply across eight phases with
project management and clear module-wise division
financial principles in of work, timelines, integra-
engineering work. tion milestones, and hard-
ware procurement planning
for DuckieBot and CARLA
infrastructure.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 19
=== PAGE 27 ===
Chapter: 7
PO11 Life-long Learning: Rec- 3 The team independently
ognize the need for life-long studied cutting-edge re-
learning amidst technologi- search from 2022 to 2025 on
cal change. Bayesian Neural Networks,
conformal prediction, and
graph-based uncertainty
communication — all
topics beyond standard
curriculum — demonstrat-
ing self-directed life-long
learning.
Table 7.1: Program Outcomes (PO) Mapping – Cognix
7.2 Program Specific Outcome (PSO) Mapping
PSO Description Mapping Justification
Number Level
PSO1 Interpret data and apply 3 Cognix interprets multi-
Artificial Intelligence al- modal sensor data from
gorithms to provide solu- camera, LIDAR, and
tions. radar agents and ap-
plies Bayesian Neural
Networks, Graph Neural
Networks, Loopy Be-
lief Propagation, and
conformal prediction al-
gorithms to provide safe
and calibrated solutions
for multi-agent decision
making in autonomous
driving, medical diag-
nosis, and distributed
robotics.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 20
=== PAGE 28 ===
Chapter: 7
PSO2 Apply standard prac- 3 Standard Bayesian infer-
tices, strategies and ence practices, Shapley
use appropriate models value attribution analy-
of data analytics to sis, and Expected Cal-
discover knowledge. ibration Error evalua-
tion strategies are ap-
plied to multi-agent sen-
sor data to discover ac-
tionable knowledge —
identifying which agents
are reliable, which uncer-
tainty sources can be re-
duced, and which scenar-
ios require human inter-
vention.
Table 7.2: Program Specific Outcomes (PSO) Mapping – Cognix
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 21
=== PAGE 29 ===
Chapter: 8
Chapter 8
Summary
COGNIX is an uncertainty-aware multi-agent AI framework that prioritizes both
prediction accuracy and decision reliability. By integrating Bayesian uncertainty estimation,
belief propagation across agents, and a Conformal Calibration Layer, the system produces
statisticallyguaranteedconfidenceintervalsratherthanoverconfidentpointpredictions. The
Conformal Calibration module — the primary contribution of this report — converts raw
agent outputs into calibrated prediction intervals that provably contain the true outcome at
aspecifiedconfidencelevel, improvinginterpretabilityandtrustworthinessatbothindividual
andcollectivedecisionlevels. Overall, COGNIXprovidesapracticalandprincipledapproach
to building transparent AI systems for high-stakes environments where decision reliability is
critical.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 22
=== PAGE 30 ===
Chapter: 8
References
[1] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2016.
[2] C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Springer, 2006.
[3] Y. Gal and Z. Ghahramani, ”Dropout as a Bayesian Approximation: Representing
Model Uncertainty in Deep Learning,” in ICML, 2016.
[4] B. Lakshminarayanan, A. Pritzel, and C. Blundell, ”Simple and Scalable Predictive
Uncertainty Estimation using Deep Ensembles,” in NeurIPS, 2017.
[5] C. Guo, G. Pleiss, Y. Sun, and K. Q. Weinberger, ”On Calibration of Modern Neural
Networks,” in ICML, 2017.
[6] J. Platt, ”Probabilistic Outputs for Support Vector Machines,” 1999.
[7] V. Vovk, A. Gammerman, and G. Shafer, Algorithmic Learning in a Random World.
Springer, 2005.
[8] A. N. Angelopoulos and S. Bates, ”A Gentle Introduction to Conformal Prediction and
Distribution-Free Uncertainty Quantification,” 2021.
[9] Y. Romano, E. Patterson, and E. Cand`es, ”Conformalized Quantile Regression,” in
NeurIPS, 2019.
[10] J. Lei et al., ”Distribution-Free Predictive Inference for Regression,” JASA, 2018.
[11] V. Kuleshov, N. Fenner, and S. Ermon, ”Accurate Uncertainties for Deep Learning
Using Calibrated Regression,” in ICML, 2018.
[12] M. Abdar et al., ”A Review of Uncertainty Quantification in Deep Learning,” Informa-
tion Fusion, 2021.
[13] A. Kendall and Y. Gal, ”What Uncertainties Do We Need in Bayesian Deep Learning
for Computer Vision?” in NeurIPS, 2017.
[14] T. G. Dietterich, ”Ensemble Methods in Machine Learning,” in Multiple Classifier Sys-
tems, 2000.
[15] Z.-H. Zhou, Ensemble Methods: Foundations and Algorithms. CRC Press, 2012.
[16] L. Busoniu, R. Babuˇska, and B. De Schutter, ”A Comprehensive Survey of Multiagent
,
Reinforcement Learning,” IEEE TSMC, 2008.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 23
=== PAGE 31 ===
Chapter: 8
[17] F. A. Oliehoek and C. Amato, A Concise Introduction to Decentralized POMDPs.
Springer, 2016.
[18] P. Stone and M. Veloso, ”Multiagent Systems: A Survey from a Machine Learning
Perspective,” Autonomous Robots, 2000.
[19] K. Zhang et al., ”Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning: A Selective Overview,” IEEE
TNNLS, 2021.
[20] M. Sensoy, L. Kaplan, and M. Kandemir, ”Evidential Deep Learning to Quantify Clas-
sification Uncertainty,” in NeurIPS, 2018.
[21] R. M. Neal, Bayesian Learning for Neural Networks. Springer, 1995.
[22] K. P. Murphy, Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective. MIT Press, 2012.
[23] C. M. Bishop, ”Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Science and
Statistics),” 2007.
[24] G. Shafer and V. Vovk, ”A Tutorial on Conformal Prediction,” JMLR, 2008.
[25] H. Papadopoulos et al., ”Inductive Confidence Machines for Regression,” ECML, 2002.
[26] A. Angelopoulos et al., ”Conformal Prediction: A Unified Review,” Foundations and
Trends in ML, 2023.
[27] Y. Liu et al., ”A Survey on Deep Learning-Based Uncertainty Estimation,” 2020.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 24