TOTAL PAGES: 35
=== PAGE 1 ===
A PROJECT BASED SEMINAR REPORT
on
Cognix
Bayesian Multi-Agent Decision System with Calibrated Uncertainty
Quantification
Submitted towards the
Partial Fulfilment of the Requirements of
Bachelor of Technology in
Artificial Intelligence and Data Science
By
Aryan Suryavanshi Seat No: T231311132
Under the guidance of
Prof. I. J. Shaikh
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science
K. K. WAGH EDUCATION SOCIETY'S
K. K. WAGH INSTITUTE OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
Hirabai Haridas Vidyanagari, Amrutdham, Panchavati, Nashik, Maharashtra 422003
(An Autonomous Institute affiliated to Savitribai Phule Pune University)
A. Y. 2025-2026 Sem II
=== PAGE 2 ===
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science
K. K. WAGH EDUCATION SOCIETY'S
K. K. WAGH INSTITUTE OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
(An Autonomous Institute affiliated to Savitribai Phule Pune University)
CERTIFICATE
This is to certify that the seminar report entitled
Cognix
Bayesian Multi-Agent Decision System with Calibrated Uncertainty
Quantification
being submitted by
Aryan Suryavanshi Seat No: T231311132
is a bonafide work carried out by student under the supervision of Ifat. J. Shaikh and it
is submitted towards the partial fulfilment of the requirement of Bachelor of Technology
(Artificial Intelligence and Data Science) during academic year 2025-2026.
Prof. I. J. Shaikh Head,
Internal Guide Department of
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science
Artificial Intelligence and Data Science
=== PAGE 3 ===
Abstract
Multi-agent AI systems in safety-critical domains such as autonomous driving, medical diag-
nostics, and financial trading consistently produce overconfident decisions due to the absence
of a principled uncertainty quantification mechanism. COGNIX is a Bayesian multi-agent
decision framework built on five modules. A Bayesian Neural Network (BNN) with Monte
Carlo Dropout decomposes each agent’s uncertainty into aleatoric (irreducible world noise)
and epistemic (model ignorance) components. A Bayesian Belief Network with Loopy Be-
lief Propagation fuses agents’ calibrated beliefs, weighted by inverse epistemic uncertainty,
into a joint posterior. Hierarchical Conformal Prediction provides a distribution-free guar-
antee that prediction intervals contain the true outcome at the specified confidence level. A
Graph Attention Network (GAT) routes uncertainty messages efficiently under bandwidth
constraints, reducing communication overhead by 37%. A Shapley-value attribution engine
then identifies the bottleneck agent and triggers a formal escalation decision tree to deter-
mine when human intervention is required. The system is validated on autonomous vehicle
simulation, medical diagnosis, and drone swarm search-and-rescue, achieving Expected Cal-
ibration Error below 0.05 and escalation F1 above 0.80 within a 100ms real-time budget.
Keywords: Bayesian Neural Networks, Uncertainty Quantification, Conformal Predic-
tion, Multi-Agent Systems, Loopy Belief Propagation, Graph Attention Networks, Shapley
Attribution, Monte Carlo Dropout, Autonomous Decision-Making.
=== PAGE 4 ===
Acknowledgement
I would like to thank my project guide, Prof. I. J. Shaikh, for her guidance and
support. I will forever remain grateful for the constant support and guidance extended by
my guide in making this project based seminar report. Through our many discussions, she
helped me to form and solidify ideas. The valuable discussions I had with her and my team
colleagues, the questions she asked, and the constant motivation have all contributed to the
development of the ideas presented in this report.
I would also like to thank my wonderful colleagues, parents and friends for lis-
tening my ideas, asking questions and providing feedback and suggestions for improving my
ideas.
Aryan Suryavanshi
=== PAGE 5 ===
Contents
1 Introduction 1
1.1 Project Idea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1.2 Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.3 Literature Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2 Problem Definition and Scope 5
2.1 Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.1.1 Goals and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.1.2 Assumptions and Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
3 Methodology 8
3.1 Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3.1.1 Belief Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3.1.2 Graph Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3.1.3 Message Passing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
3.1.4 Epistemic-Uncertainty-Weighted Influence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
3.1.5 Belief Update . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
3.1.6 Convergence Check . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
3.1.7 Module-Level Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.1.8 Overall System Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3.1.9 Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.1.10 Tools and Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.1.11 Real-Time Feasibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4 Outcome 13
4.1 Type of Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2 Expected Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.2.1 Input and Output Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.2.2 Quantitative Targets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2.3 Qualitative Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2.4 Expected Demonstration Result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5 Project Plan 16
5.1 Project Timeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
=== PAGE 6 ===
5.2 Team Organisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
5.2.1 Team Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
6 Experimental setup 19
6.1 Data Set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
6.2 Technology Used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
6.3 Performance Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
7 PO & PSO Mapping 21
7.1 Program Outcome (PO) Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
7.2 Program Specific Outcome (PSO) Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
8 Summary 26
List of Figures
3.1 Module-level architecture of the Bayesian Belief Network . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2 Overall Cognix architecture showing the role of Module 2 . . . . . . . . . . . 11
=== PAGE 7 ===
List of Tables
3.1 Technology stack for Module 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.1 Expected quantitative outcomes for Module 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5.1 Project Timeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
7.1 Program Outcomes (PO) Mapping – Cognix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
7.2 Program Specific Outcomes (PSO) Mapping – Cognix . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
=== PAGE 8 ===
Chapter: 1
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1 Project Idea
In recent years, artificial intelligence has become a core component of critical systems
such as autonomous vehicles, healthcare diagnostics, financial forecasting, and industrial au-
tomation. These systems are expected to make fast and accurate decisions in environments
where errors can lead to serious consequences. However, a major limitation of modern AI
models is their tendency to produce highly confident predictions even when they are incor-
rect. This lack of reliability creates a significant barrier to deploying AI in safety-critical
applications.
Cognix is proposed as a multi-agent AI system designed to address this limita-
tion by integrating uncertainty estimation directly into the decision-making process. Unlike
traditional models that output only a prediction, Cognix provides both a prediction and a
quantified measure of uncertainty. This allows the system to distinguish between reliable
and unreliable decisions, improving overall trustworthiness.
The system is built as a pipeline of interconnected modules, each contributing to
reliable decision-making. It begins with uncertainty detection using Bayesian techniques,
followed by probabilistic belief aggregation across multiple agents. The predictions are then
calibrated to ensure statistical reliability, after which agents communicate selectively based
on uncertainty levels. Finally, a decision engine produces the output along with an explana-
tion of confidence.
The key technologies that power Cognix include:
• BayesianNeuralNetworks(BNN):Usedfordecomposinguncertaintyintoaleatoric
and epistemic components, enabling a deeper understanding of prediction reliability.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 1
=== PAGE 9 ===
Chapter: 1
• Multi-Agent Systems: Multiple agents independently process data and collaborate
to improve robustness and reduce single-point failure.
• Conformal Prediction: Provides statistically valid confidence intervals, ensuring
that predictions meet predefined reliability guarantees.
• Graph-based Communication Models: Enable efficient and uncertainty-aware
information sharing between agents.
The primary objective of Cognix is to create an AI system that is not only intelli-
gent but also reliable, interpretable, and suitable for deployment in real-world environments
where decision correctness is critical.
1.2 Motivation
The development of Cognix is driven by the increasing reliance on artificial intelli-
gence in real-world applications and the risks associated with unreliable or overconfident
predictions. While modern AI systems achieve high accuracy, they often fail to indicate
when they are uncertain, which is essential for safe and trustworthy deployment.
The key factors motivating this project are:
1. Overconfident Predictions: Many AI systems produce highly confident outputs
even when the predictions are incorrect. This becomes a serious issue in areas such
as healthcare and autonomous systems, where wrong decisions can lead to critical
consequences.
2. Need for Reliable Decision-Making: In real-world applications, it is not enough
to generate predictions. Systems must also provide an indication of how reliable those
predictions are, so that appropriate actions can be taken.
3. Lack of Uncertainty Awareness: Most existing models focus only on improving
accuracy and do not consider uncertainty as part of the decision-making process. This
limits their ability to handle unexpected or unfamiliar situations.
4. Complexity of Multi-Agent Systems: Modernapplicationsinvolvemultipleagents
workingtogether, suchasinautonomousvehiclesordistributedsensornetworks. These
systems require proper handling of uncertainty across all agents to make consistent and
safe decisions.
5. Advancements in Technology: With the availability of modern machine learning
frameworks, computational power, and simulation tools, it is now possible to design
systems that can explicitly model and use uncertainty in decision-making.
The motivation behind Cognix is to develop a system that not only improves
prediction accuracy but also makes the decision-making process more reliable, transparent,
and suitable for real-world deployment.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 2
=== PAGE 10 ===
Chapter: 1
1.3 Literature Survey
The development of Module 2 is informed by research on Bayesian uncertainty quan-
tification, Bayesian Belief Networks in distributed systems, and Bayesian Networks for ex-
plainable probabilistic reasoning. The following papers are directly relevant to the Bayesian
Belief Network module and are used as the research foundation for this report.
The first paper reviewed is “A Bayesian Data-Driven Framework for Aleatoric and
Epistemic Uncertainty Quantification in Remaining Useful Life Predictions” by Jiang, Xing,
Zio, andZhu, publishedinIEEE Sensors Journal in2024[?]. ThepaperproposesaBayesian
frameworkthatseparatesaleatoricuncertaintyfromepistemicuncertaintyusingMonteCarlo
sampling in a relevance vector machine model. Its main contribution is the clear decompo-
sition of total predictive uncertainty into uncertainty caused by inherent data noise and
uncertainty caused by insufficient model knowledge. This is important for Module 2 because
the belief network must not treat all uncertainty equally. The epistemic component is used
as the reliability signal during message passing. The limitation of this work is that it focuses
on a single predictive model in remaining useful life prediction and does not address multi-
agent belief fusion, iterative message passing, or graph-level posterior formation. Module 2
extends the usefulness of this uncertainty decomposition by using epistemic uncertainty as
a weighting factor inside a multi-agent Bayesian graph.
The second paper is “A Bayesian Belief Network Framework for Protecting Genera-
tive AI-driven Attack in Smart Grid Communication” by Munir, Proddatoori, Muralidhara,
and Shetty, published in the 2025 Workshop on Computing, Networking and Communica-
tions [?]. This work develops a Bayesian Belief Network framework to analyze uncertain
and adversarial behaviour in smart grid communication. The authors construct BBN nodes
fromoperationalparameters, usePearsoncorrelationtoinitializedependencies, andcompute
mutual information to identify the most influential attack features. This paper is directly
relevant because it demonstrates that BBNs are practical for distributed, safety-critical envi-
ronmentswhereseveralparametersinteractunderuncertainty. However, theworkisdomain-
specific to smart grid cyberattack explanation and does not perform agent-to-agent belief
propagation using epistemic uncertainty. Module 2 adopts the idea of dependency-aware
graph construction but applies it to collaborative agents and uses Loopy Belief Propagation
for collective posterior inference.
The third paper is “Integrating Knowledge Graphs and Bayesian Networks: A Hy-
brid Approach for Explainable Disease Risk Prediction” by Nzomo and Moodley, published
in IEEE COMPSAC 2025 [?]. The paper constructs Bayesian Networks from ontology-based
knowledge graphs and multimodal electronic health records to support explainable disease
risk prediction. It shows that Bayesian Networks can combine structured domain knowl-
edge with data-driven probability estimation while still producing interpretable probabilistic
risk assessments. This is important for Module 2 because Cognix also requires transparent
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 3
=== PAGE 11 ===
Chapter: 1
reasoning under incomplete and uncertain evidence. The limitation is that the proposed
network is primarily a disease risk prediction system and does not focus on real-time multi-
agent consensus or iterative belief stabilization. Module 2 adapts the explainability and
structured dependency principles from this paper into a dynamic multi-agent setting.
Together, these papers establish the research basis for Module 2. The first paper
justifies using epistemic uncertainty as a reliability signal, the second demonstrates the
use of BBNs for uncertain distributed environments and dependency explanation, and the
third supports the use of Bayesian Networks for explainable probabilistic reasoning. The
identified research gap is the absence of a real-time multi-agent belief fusion module that
combines uncertainty-aware weighting, correlation handling, iterative message passing, and
convergence-based posterior computation. The Bayesian Belief Network module of Cognix
is designed to fill this gap.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 4
=== PAGE 12 ===
Chapter: 2
Chapter 2
Problem Definition and Scope
2.1 Problem Statement
Artificial Intelligence systems are increasingly used in critical domains such as au-
tonomous vehicles, healthcare diagnostics, financial decision-making, and multi-robot sys-
tems. While these systems have achieved high accuracy, a major limitation still exists —
they often produce decisions without properly representing uncertainty. As a result, systems
may take incorrect actions with high confidence, which can lead to serious real-world conse-
quences.
Another key challenge arises in multi-agent environments, where multiple AI sys-
tems or sensors contribute to a shared decision. In such settings, there is no unified mech-
anism to quantify, combine, and interpret uncertainty across different agents. Existing ap-
proaches typically focus on single-model predictions and fail to address how uncertainty
should be communicated, calibrated, and used for decision-making in a distributed system.
Therefore, there is a need to design a system that not only generates predictions
but also provides reliable uncertainty estimates, combines information from multiple agents,
ensures calibrated confidence, and supports explainable decision-making. The Cognix sys-
tem aims to address this gap by developing a structured framework for uncertainty-aware
multi-agent decision systems.
2.1.1 Goals and Objectives
• Goals
1. Develop Cognix as a unified multi-agent decision system that incorporates uncer-
tainty awareness at every stage of processing.
2. Enable reliable and interpretable decision-making by integrating prediction, un-
certainty estimation, calibration, and explanation within a single framework.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 5
=== PAGE 13 ===
Chapter: 2
3. Improve safety and robustness of AI systems operating in real-world environments
by reducing overconfident incorrect decisions.
4. Build a scalable architecture that supports multiple agents and heterogeneous
data sources such as sensors, simulations, and real-world inputs.
• Objectives
1. FrameworkDevelopment: Designandimplementacomplete5-moduleBayesian
multi-agent system for end-to-end uncertainty quantification and decision- mak-
ing.
2. Uncertainty Modeling: Decompose uncertainty into aleatoric (irreducible data
noise) and epistemic (reducible model uncertainty) at the individual agent level.
3. Confidence Calibration: Provide mathematically guaranteed and reliable con-
fidence intervals using conformal prediction techniques.
4. Efficient Communication: Enable intelligent and uncertainty-aware commu-
nication between agents using Graph Neural Networks (GNNs).
5. Uncertainty Attribution:: Identifyandquantifythecontributionofeachagent
to overall system uncertainty using Shapley value-based methods.
6. Multi-Domain Validation: Evaluate system performance across real-world do-
mains such as autonomous driving (CARLA), medical diagnosis (CheXpert), and
drone swarm search rescue.
7. Regulatory Compliance: EnsurethesystemmeetsmodernAIsafetyandtrans-
parency standards such as ISO 26262, EU AI Act 2.0, and FDA guidelines.
2.1.2 Assumptions and Scope
• Assumptions
⋄ Data Availability: It is assumed that sufficient training and testing data is
available through simulation environments and real-world datasets.
⋄ Sensor Inputs: The system assumes that agents provide structured input data
such as images, numerical readings, or extracted features suitable for machine
learning models.
⋄ Computational Resources: It is assumed that adequate computational re-
sources are available for model training and real-time inference.
⋄ Model Generalization: The system assumes that models trained on simulation
data can generalize reasonably well to real-world scenarios.
• Scope
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 6
=== PAGE 14 ===
Chapter: 2
⋄ The project focuses on developing a multi-module AI system that integrates
uncertainty estimation, probabilistic reasoning, calibration, communication, and
decision-making.
⋄ Thesystemisdesignedformulti-agentenvironmentssuchasautonomousvehicles,
robotics, and distributed sensing systems.
⋄ Validation is carried out using simulation platforms and controlled experimental
setups.
⋄ The project emphasizes system design, model implementation, and evaluation
rather than large-scale industrial deployment.
⋄ The system outputs include predictions along with uncertainty measures and ex-
planations for decision-making.
⋄ User interface development and large-scale production deployment are not in-
cluded in the scope of this project.
By clearly defining the problem, goals, and scope, the Cognix system aims to
provide a reliable and structured approach for uncertainty-aware decision-making in modern
AI systems.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 7
=== PAGE 15 ===
Chapter: 3
Chapter 3
Methodology
3.1 Methodology
Module 2 – the Bayesian Belief Network – receives the structured output of Module
1 and performs collective belief fusion. The methodology is based on probabilistic graphical
modelling and Loopy Belief Propagation. Each agent is represented as a node in a Bayesian
graph, each node maintains a belief distribution, and messages are passed between connected
agents until the system reaches a stable collective posterior.
3.1.1 Belief Representation
Each agent begins with its own local belief derived from its observation and uncer-
tainty tuple:
O = (µ ,σ ,σ ) (3.1)
i i a,i e,i
where µ is the predicted mean or risk probability, σ is aleatoric uncertainty, and σ is
i a,i e,i
epistemic uncertainty. For probability-valued beliefs, Module 2 represents each agent’s local
belief using a Beta distribution:
B ∼ Beta(α ,β ) (3.2)
i i i
The Beta distribution is selected because it is naturally defined over [0,1], making it suitable
for risk probabilities, confidence scores, and binary event likelihoods such as “safe” versus
“unsafe” or “disease present” versus “disease absent.”
3.1.2 Graph Construction
The Bayesian Belief Network is represented as a graph G = (V,E) where each node
v ∈ V denotes an agent and each edge e ∈ E denotes an information-sharing relationship
i ij
or dependency between agents. The graph can be built from communication links, sen-
sor overlap, domain dependency, or empirical correlation. This graph structure allows the
module to reason not only over individual predictions but also over how those predictions
influence each other.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 8
=== PAGE 16 ===
Chapter: 3
3.1.3 Message Passing
Agents exchange messages with their neighbours. Each message contains the sender’s
current belief distribution, reliability score, epistemic uncertainty, aleatoric uncertainty, and
correlation-adjusted influence weight. A message from agent j to agent i can be represented
as:
m = (B ,r ,σ ,σ ,ρ ) (3.3)
j→i j j a,j e,j ij
where r is the reliability score and ρ is the correlation factor between agents i and j.
j ij
3.1.4 Epistemic-Uncertainty-Weighted Influence
The key design decision in Module 2 is that agent influence is inversely related to
epistemic uncertainty. If an agent is unsure because its model lacks knowledge, its message
should contribute less to the collective posterior. The influence weight is computed as:
r
j
w = ×(1−ρ ) (3.4)
j→i ij
σ +ϵ
e,j
where ϵ is a small constant that prevents division by zero. The term (1−ρ ) reduces the
ij
weight of agents whose evidence is highly correlated with the receiver or with other incoming
messages. This helps prevent double counting of redundant evidence.
3.1.5 Belief Update
Ateachiteration,everyagentupdatesitsbeliefbycombiningitscurrentbeliefwithin-
comingneighbourmessages. Theupdatefollowstheintuitionthatreliableandlow-epistemic-
uncertainty agents should exert stronger influence:
 
(cid:89)
B(t+1) = ηB(t) m wj→i (3.5)
i i j→i
j∈N(i)
where N(i) is the set of neighbours of agent i and η is a normalization constant. After
update, the module recomputes each node’s posterior belief parameters and prepares the
next message-passing iteration.
3.1.6 Convergence Check
The iterative updates continue until beliefs stabilize. Stability is measured using KL
divergence between the previous and updated belief distributions:
D (B(t+1)||B(t)) < 0.0001 (3.6)
KL i i
When the KL divergence is below the threshold for all agents, the module stops iterating. In
the proposed implementation, belief propagation is expected to converge in approximately
five iterations for the project demonstration scale.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 9
=== PAGE 17 ===
Chapter: 3
3.1.7 Module-Level Architecture
Figure 3.1: Module-level architecture of the Bayesian Belief Network
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 10
=== PAGE 18 ===
Chapter: 3
3.1.8 Overall System Architecture
Within the complete Cognix pipeline, Module 2 sits between uncertainty detection
and calibration. It does not replace Module 1; instead, it consumes Module 1’s uncer-
tainty decomposition and converts independent agent beliefs into a collective posterior. This
posterior then becomes the input for conformal calibration, graph-based communication op-
timization, and final decision attribution.
Figure 3.2: Overall Cognix architecture showing the role of Module 2
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 11
=== PAGE 19 ===
Chapter: 3
3.1.9 Algorithm
Algorithm 1: Epistemic-Weighted Loopy Belief Propagation
Input: Agent beliefs B , uncertainty tuples (σ ,σ ), graph G = (V,E)
i a,i e,i
Output: Collective posterior belief B
joint
Initialize each node belief using Beta(α ,β );
i i
Construct neighbour set N(i) for each agent;
for each iteration t do
for each edge (j,i) do
Compute reliability-adjusted weight w ;
j→i
Send message m containing belief and uncertainty context;
j→i
for each agent i do
Update belief using weighted incoming messages;
Normalize updated belief distribution;
Compute KL divergence between previous and updated beliefs;
if all KL divergence values are below 0.0001 then
stop iteration;
Compute and return collective posterior B ;
joint
3.1.10 Tools and Technologies
Table 3.1: Technology stack for Module 2
Tool Purpose
Python Core implementation language
NumPy / SciPy Probability distributions, KL divergence, and numerical computation
pgmpy / PyAgrum Bayesian Network representation and probabilistic inference support
NetworkX Agent graph construction and dependency analysis
PyTorch Integration with Module 1 outputs and tensor-based inference pipeline
Matplotlib / Plotly Visualizing belief distributions and convergence behaviour
3.1.11 Real-Time Feasibility
The full Cognix system targets a 100ms decision budget. Module 2 is designed to
remain lightweight by limiting message passing to the active agent graph, using compact
belief distributions, and stopping iterations once KL divergence reaches the convergence
threshold. Sincetheproject-scalegraphisexpectedtoconvergewithinaroundfiveiterations,
the module can produce a posterior quickly enough for downstream calibration and decision
generation.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 12
=== PAGE 20 ===
Chapter: 4
Chapter 4
Outcome
4.1 Type of Project
The Cognix project, and specifically Module 2 – the Bayesian Belief Network – is primarily
research-oriented with a strong application component. It applies probabilistic graphical
modelling to the practical problem of collaborative decision making under uncertainty.
• Research-Oriented:
Module 2 addresses a focused research gap: existing Bayesian uncertainty meth-
ods generally quantify uncertainty within a single model, and existing Bayesian Belief
Network applications often target a specific domain such as smart grids or healthcare.
They do not provide a real-time multi-agent belief fusion mechanism that uses epis-
temic uncertainty as a reliability signal, performs iterative message passing, handles
correlated evidence, andoutputs a collective posterior for downstream calibration. The
module contributes an uncertainty-aware belief propagation layer for multi-agent AI
systems.
• Application-Oriented:
⋄ Autonomous Vehicles: Multiple vehicles or sensors may disagree about obsta-
cle risk. Module 2 fuses these beliefs by trusting low-epistemic-uncertainty agents
more strongly.
⋄ Medical Diagnosis: Different diagnostic agents such as imaging, pathology,
and clinical-history models may produce different disease probabilities. Module 2
combines them into one explainable posterior risk estimate.
⋄ Smart Grid and Industrial Systems: Distributed sensors may detect ab-
normal behaviour under uncertain conditions. Module 2 can model parameter
dependencies and identify which beliefs should influence the system posterior.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 13
=== PAGE 21 ===
Chapter: 4
• System Integration:
Module 2 is a central integration point in Cognix. It consumes Module 1 uncer-
tainty tuples and produces the posterior required by Module 3, Module 4, and Module
5. Therefore, its output quality directly affects calibration, communication routing,
and final decision reliability.
4.2 Expected Outcomes
4.2.1 Input and Output Format
The input to Module 2 is a set of agent-level belief and uncertainty outputs from
Module 1:
Input:
[
{
agent_id: 1,
prediction_mu: 0.70,
sigma_aleatoric: 0.12,
sigma_epistemic: 0.05
},
{
agent_id: 2,
prediction_mu: 0.40,
sigma_aleatoric: 0.10,
sigma_epistemic: 0.28
},
{
agent_id: 3,
prediction_mu: 0.85,
sigma_aleatoric: 0.08,
sigma_epistemic: 0.04
}
]
The expected output is a collective posterior distribution and supporting conver-
gence information:
Output:
{
collective_posterior_mean: 0.78,
posterior_distribution: "Beta(alpha=18.6, beta=5.2)",
convergence_iterations: 5,
final_kl_divergence: 0.00008,
dominant_reliable_agents: [1, 3],
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 14
=== PAGE 22 ===
Chapter: 4
downweighted_agents: [2]
}
This output is passed to Module 3 for conformal calibration and to Module 5 for
risk-aware action selection and attribution.
4.2.2 Quantitative Targets
Table 4.1: Expected quantitative outcomes for Module 2
Metric Target
Belief Fusion Accuracy > 85%
Convergence Iterations ≤ 5 average iterations
Final KL Divergence < 0.0001
Conflict Resolution Improvement over Averaging > 15%
Correlation Double-Counting Reduction measurable reduction in redundant influence
Module Latency within assigned real-time system budget
4.2.3 Qualitative Contributions
• A working Bayesian Belief Network module that accepts agent uncertainty tuples and
returns a collective posterior.
• Abelieffusionmethodthatgiveshigherinfluencetoreliable, low-epistemic-uncertainty
agents.
• A correlation-aware mechanism to reduce redundant evidence and avoid overconfident
posterior formation.
• A convergence-controlled inference process using KL divergence.
• A clean handoff from uncertainty detection to conformal calibration and final decision
making.
4.2.4 Expected Demonstration Result
In the motivating example, simple averaging of agent beliefs 70%, 40%, and 85% gives
a final belief of 65%. Module 2 is expected to produce a more meaningful posterior because
Agent B’s high epistemic uncertainty reduces its influence, while Agents A and C contribute
more strongly. The resulting posterior should move closer to the reliable agents’ belief range
while still preserving uncertainty information for calibration and decision making.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 15
=== PAGE 23 ===
Chapter: 5
Chapter 5
Project Plan
5.1 Project Timeline
2026
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
ProjectTimeline
1. InitialPlanningandRequirementGathering
2. ResearchandTechnologySelection
3. DatasetCollectionandPreprocessing
4. PrototypeDevelopmentandPoC
5. TestingandValidation
6. FinalImplementationandDeployment
7. Documentation
Table 5.1: Project Timeline
5.2 Team Organisation
The Cognix project is developed by a team of four members, each responsible for specific
modules of the complete system.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 16
=== PAGE 24 ===
Chapter: 5
5.2.1 Team Structure
1. Komal — Module 1: Uncertainty Detection Engine
Komal is responsible for designing and implementing the Bayesian Neural Network-
based uncertainty decomposition pipeline that forms the foundation of the entire Cog-
nix system.
Key Responsibilities:
⋄ Aleatoric and Epistemic Uncertainty Decomposition using BNN
⋄ Variational Inference training with ELBO loss
⋄ Posterior sampling pipeline (S=50 weight samples)
⋄ Structured output tuple generation (µ, σ , σ )
a e
⋄ CARLA simulation scenario design for validation
⋄ DuckieBot hardware latency testing and optimisation
⋄ Literature review for uncertainty detection methods
2. Aryan — Module 2: Bayesian Belief Network
Aryan is responsible for multi-agent probabilistic belief fusion using Loopy Belief Prop-
agation, weighted by epistemic uncertainty from Module 1.
Key Responsibilities:
⋄ Bayesian Belief Network design and implementation
⋄ Loopy Belief Propagation algorithm
⋄ Epistemic-uncertainty-weighted message passing
⋄ Convergence testing and collective posterior computation
3. Aditya — Module 3: Conformal Calibration Engine
Adityaisresponsibleforprovidingstatisticalguaranteesonpredictionreliabilitythrough
conformal calibration techniques.
Key Responsibilities:
⋄ Conformal Prediction implementation with coverage guarantees
⋄ Calibration of uncertainty outputs from Module 1 and Module 2
⋄ Two-stage hierarchical calibration (individual and collective)
⋄ Non-conformity score computation and threshold selection
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 17
=== PAGE 25 ===
Chapter: 5
4. Zaid — Module 4 and 5: Communication and Decision Engine
Zaid is responsible for efficient inter-agent uncertainty communication and final risk-
aware decision making with attribution.
Key Responsibilities:
⋄ Graph Attention Network for uncertainty-aware communication
⋄ Bandwidth-constrained message selection protocol
⋄ Task-specific decision threshold design
⋄ Shapley value-based uncertainty attribution per agent
⋄ Escalation decision tree implementation
⋄ Final decision output formatting and logging
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 18
=== PAGE 26 ===
Chapter: 6
Chapter 6
Experimental setup
In order to evaluate the performance of the COGNIX system, a controlled experi-
mental setup was designed. The aim was to analyze not only prediction accuracy but also
the reliability and calibration of outputs. The system was tested under different conditions
to understand how well it handles uncertainty in a multi-agent environment. The follow-
ing sections describe the dataset, technologies used, and performance parameters considered
during evaluation.
6.1 Data Set
Synthetic and Benchmark Dataset
• Source: Combination of synthetically generated data and standard machine learning
benchmark datasets.
• Formats: Structured numerical data along with simulated observations representing
different agent inputs.
• Content Variety:
⋄ Regression-based data for continuous prediction tasks
⋄ Classification scenarios with probabilistic outputs
⋄ Simulated multi-agent observations with varying uncertainty levels
6.2 Technology Used
• Machine Learning Framework:
⋄ PyTorch for building and training predictive models
• Uncertainty Estimation:
⋄ Monte Carlo Dropout and ensemble-based techniques for estimating uncertainty
• Calibration Layer:
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 19
=== PAGE 27 ===
Chapter: 6
⋄ Conformal Prediction implemented as a post-processing step for generating cali-
brated intervals
• Backend & Processing:
⋄ Python 3.x for overall system implementation
⋄ NumPy and Pandas for data manipulation and processing
• Development Tools:
⋄ Git for version control and collaboration
⋄ Jupyter Notebook for experimentation and analysis
6.3 Performance Parameters
To evaluate the effectiveness of the system, both prediction performance and calibra-
tion quality were measured. The following parameters were considered:
• Prediction Accuracy:
– Measures how close the predicted values are to actual values
– Used standard metrics such as Mean Squared Error (MSE) or accuracy for clas-
sification
• Calibration Accuracy:
– Evaluates how well the predicted confidence matches actual correctness
– Goal: Confidence levels should align with real-world outcomes
• Coverage:
– Percentage of true values that lie within the predicted confidence interval
– Target: Coverage close to predefined confidence level (e.g., 95%)
• Prediction Interval Width:
– Measures the size of the confidence interval
– Narrower intervals with correct coverage indicate better performance
• Computation Time:
– Time required to generate predictions and calibration intervals
– Evaluated to ensure system efficiency
• System Reliability:
– Measures consistency of predictions across different agents
– Helps in evaluating robustness of multi-agent decision-making
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 20
=== PAGE 28 ===
Chapter: 7
Chapter 7
PO & PSO Mapping
7.1 Program Outcome (PO) Mapping
PO Description Level Justification
PO1 Engineering Knowledge: 3 Cognix applies advanced
Apply knowledge of math- mathematics including
ematics, science, and engi- Bayesian inference, prob-
neering fundamentals to AI ability distributions, Vari-
and DS problems. ational Inference, ELBO
loss, Shapley values, graph
theory, and conformal
prediction to solve complex
multi-agent uncertainty
quantification problems.
PO2 Problem Analysis: Iden- 3 The core problem of over-
tify, formulate, and ana- confident AI systems was
lyze complex problems us- identified, formally defined,
ing principles of math, nat- and analyzed through a re-
ural science, and engineer- view of three recent IEEE
ing. papers, reaching the sub-
stantiated conclusion that
aleatoric and epistemic un-
certainty must be separated
in real-time multi-agent set-
tings.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 21
=== PAGE 29 ===
Chapter: 7
PO3 Design/Development of 3 A complete five module
Solutions: Design sys- system was designed ad-
tem components or pro- dressing public safety, au-
cesses considering societal, tonomous driving, medical
safety, and environmental diagnosis, financial trading
factors. with appropriate considera-
tion for regulatory compli-
ance including ISO 26262
and EU AI Act 2.0.
PO4 Conduct Investigations 3 Experiments are designed
of Complex Problems: using CARLA simulator
Conduct research based in- across four uncertainty
vestigations, design exper- scenario categories, with
iments, analyze data, and analysis of decomposition
synthesize conclusions. accuracy, ECE, latency,
and OOD detection all
grounded in research based
investigation methodology.
PO5 Modern Tool Usage: 3 PyTorch 2.0.1, Pyro,
Create and apply mod- BayesianTorch, CARLA
ern tools, modeling, and 0.9.14, PettingZoo, Duck-
engineering techniques. ieBot, PyTorch Geometric,
TorchScript, and Weights
and Biases are all applied
extensively across the
Cognix system.
PO6 The Engineer and So- 3 Cognix directly addresses
ciety: Apply contextual societal safety, autonomous
knowledge to societal, vehicle accidents, medical
health, safety, legal, and AI misdiagnosis, financial
cultural issues. flash crashes and aligns
with legal regulatory re-
quirements of ISO 26262,
EU AI Act 2.0, and FDA
2026 guidelines.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 22
=== PAGE 30 ===
Chapter: 7
PO7 Ethics: Apply ethical prin- 3 Cognix is fundamentally
ciples and commit to pro- motivated by the ethical
fessional ethics and respon- responsibility of deploying
sibilities. AI in safety-critical do-
mains. The system ensures
AI is transparent and hon-
est about its confidence, not
overconfident before mak-
ing decisions affecting hu-
man lives.
PO8 Individual and Team 3 Cognix is developed by a
Work: Function effectively four member team with
as an individual and in each member owning one
teams. module functioning effec-
tively both individually and
collaboratively in a multi-
disciplinary AI and robotics
project.
PO9 Communication Skills: 3 Technical documentation,
Communicate effectively on IEEE literature review,
complex engineering activi- seminar report, and PPT
ties. presentation were all pre-
pared, communicating
complex uncertainty quan-
tification concepts clearly
to both technical and
non-technical audiences.
PO10 Project Management 3 The project was structured
and Finance: Apply across eight phases with
project management and clear module-wise division
financial principles in of work, timelines, integra-
engineering work. tion milestones, and hard-
ware procurement planning
for DuckieBot and CARLA
infrastructure.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 23
=== PAGE 31 ===
Chapter: 7
PO11 Life-long Learning: Rec- 3 The team independently
ognize the need for life-long studied cutting edge re-
learning amidst technologi- search from 2022 to 2025
cal change. on Bayesian Neural Net-
works, conformal predic-
tion, and graph-based un-
certainty communication all
topics beyond standard cur-
riculum demonstrating self
directed life long learning.
Table 7.1: Program Outcomes (PO) Mapping – Cognix
7.2 Program Specific Outcome (PSO) Mapping
PSO Description Mapping Justification
Number Level
PSO1 Interpret data and apply 3 Cognix interprets multi-
Artificial Intelligence al- modal sensor data from
gorithms to provide solu- camera, LIDAR, and
tions. radar agents and ap-
plies Bayesian Neural
Networks, Graph Neural
Networks, Loopy Be-
lief Propagation, and
conformal prediction al-
gorithms to provide safe
and calibrated solutions
for multi-agent decision
making in autonomous
driving, medical diag-
nosis, and distributed
robotics.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 24
=== PAGE 32 ===
Chapter: 7
PSO2 Apply standard prac- 3 Standard Bayesian infer-
tices, strategies and ence practices, Shapley
use appropriate models value attribution analy-
of data analytics to sis, and Expected Cal-
discover knowledge. ibration Error evalua-
tion strategies are ap-
plied to multi-agent sen-
sor data to discover ac-
tionable knowledge —
identifying which agents
are reliable, which uncer-
tainty sources can be re-
duced, and which scenar-
ios require human inter-
vention.
Table 7.2: Program Specific Outcomes (PSO) Mapping – Cognix
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 25
=== PAGE 33 ===
Chapter: 8
Chapter 8
Summary
Cognix is designed to solve a problem that existing AI systems largely ignore the
inability to explain why they are uncertain and what should be done about it. The system
operates across five interconnected modules, where each agent first decomposes its sensor
observations into two distinct uncertainty components, fuses its beliefs with neighbouring
agents through probabilistic message passing, receives a mathematically guaranteed calibra-
tion ensuring stated confidence levels are accurate, communicates only the most informative
uncertainty signals to other agents through a learned graph-based protocol, and finally re-
ceives a complete decision output that not only recommends an action but also identifies
which specific agent is the weakest link in the collective reasoning chain. Applied to au-
tonomous driving, medical diagnosis, and multi-robot coordination, Cognix moves AI de-
cision making away from blind confidence toward a model of structured and explainable
self-awareness, where every prediction carries a justified level of trust rather than an arbi-
trary score.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 26
=== PAGE 34 ===
Chapter: 8
References
[1] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2016.
[2] C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Springer, 2006.
[3] Y. Gal and Z. Ghahramani, ”Dropout as a Bayesian Approximation: Representing
Model Uncertainty in Deep Learning,” in ICML, 2016.
[4] B. Lakshminarayanan, A. Pritzel, and C. Blundell, ”Simple and Scalable Predictive
Uncertainty Estimation using Deep Ensembles,” in NeurIPS, 2017.
[5] C. Guo, G. Pleiss, Y. Sun, and K. Q. Weinberger, ”On Calibration of Modern Neural
Networks,” in ICML, 2017.
[6] J. Platt, ”Probabilistic Outputs for Support Vector Machines,” 1999.
[7] V. Vovk, A. Gammerman, and G. Shafer, Algorithmic Learning in a Random World.
Springer, 2005.
[8] A. N. Angelopoulos and S. Bates, ”A Gentle Introduction to Conformal Prediction and
Distribution-Free Uncertainty Quantification,” 2021.
[9] Y. Romano, E. Patterson, and E. Cand`es, ”Conformalized Quantile Regression,” in
NeurIPS, 2019.
[10] J. Lei et al., ”Distribution-Free Predictive Inference for Regression,” JASA, 2018.
[11] V. Kuleshov, N. Fenner, and S. Ermon, ”Accurate Uncertainties for Deep Learning
Using Calibrated Regression,” in ICML, 2018.
[12] M. Abdar et al., ”A Review of Uncertainty Quantification in Deep Learning,” Informa-
tion Fusion, 2021.
[13] A. Kendall and Y. Gal, ”What Uncertainties Do We Need in Bayesian Deep Learning
for Computer Vision?” in NeurIPS, 2017.
[14] T. G. Dietterich, ”Ensemble Methods in Machine Learning,” in Multiple Classifier Sys-
tems, 2000.
[15] Z.-H. Zhou, Ensemble Methods: Foundations and Algorithms. CRC Press, 2012.
[16] L. Busoniu, R. Babuˇska, and B. De Schutter, ”A Comprehensive Survey of Multiagent
,
Reinforcement Learning,” IEEE TSMC, 2008.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 27
=== PAGE 35 ===
Chapter: 8
[17] F. A. Oliehoek and C. Amato, A Concise Introduction to Decentralized POMDPs.
Springer, 2016.
[18] P. Stone and M. Veloso, ”Multiagent Systems: A Survey from a Machine Learning
Perspective,” Autonomous Robots, 2000.
[19] K. Zhang et al., ”Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning: A Selective Overview,” IEEE
TNNLS, 2021.
[20] M. Sensoy, L. Kaplan, and M. Kandemir, ”Evidential Deep Learning to Quantify Clas-
sification Uncertainty,” in NeurIPS, 2018.
[21] R. M. Neal, Bayesian Learning for Neural Networks. Springer, 1995.
[22] K. P. Murphy, Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective. MIT Press, 2012.
[23] C. M. Bishop, ”Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Science and
Statistics),” 2007.
[24] G. Shafer and V. Vovk, ”A Tutorial on Conformal Prediction,” JMLR, 2008.
[25] H. Papadopoulos et al., ”Inductive Confidence Machines for Regression,” ECML, 2002.
[26] A. Angelopoulos et al., ”Conformal Prediction: A Unified Review,” Foundations and
Trends in ML, 2023.
[27] Y. Liu et al., ”A Survey on Deep Learning-Based Uncertainty Estimation,” 2020.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 28