TOTAL PAGES: 33
=== PAGE 1 ===
A PROJECT BASED SEMINAR REPORT
on
Cognix
Bayesian Multi-Agent Decision System with Calibrated Uncertainty
Quantification
Submitted towards the
Partial Fulfilment of the Requirements of
Bachelor of Technology in
Artificial Intelligence and Data Science
By
Komal Sunil Shinde Seat No: T231311124
Under the guidance of
Prof. I. J. Shaikh
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science
K. K. WAGH EDUCATION SOCIETY
K. K. WAGH INSTITUTE OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
Hirabai Haridas Vidyanagari, Amrutdham, Panchavati, Nashik, Maharashtra 422003
(An Autonomous Institute affiliated to Savitribai Phule Pune University)
A. Y. 2025-2026 Sem II
=== PAGE 2 ===
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science
K. K. WAGH EDUCATION SOCIETY'S
K. K. WAGH INSTITUTE OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
(An Autonomous Institute affiliated to Savitribai Phule Pune University)
CERTIFICATE
This is to certify that the seminar report entitled
Cognix
Bayesian Multi-Agent Decision System with Calibrated Uncertainty
Quantification
being submitted by
Komal Sunil Shinde Seat No: T231311124
is a bonafide work carried out by student under the supervision of Ifat. J. Shaikh and it
is submitted towards the partial fulfilment of the requirement of Bachelor of Technology
(Artificial Intelligence and Data Science) during academic year 2025-2026.
Prof. I. J. Shaikh Head,
Internal Guide Department of
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science
Artificial Intelligence and Data Science
=== PAGE 3 ===
Abstract
Multi-agent AI systems in safety-critical domains such as autonomous driving, medical diag-
nostics, and financial trading consistently produce overconfident decisions due to the absence
of a principled uncertainty quantification mechanism. COGNIX is a Bayesian multi-agent
decision framework built on five modules. A Bayesian Neural Network (BNN) with Monte
Carlo Dropout decomposes each agent’s uncertainty into aleatoric (irreducible world noise)
and epistemic (model ignorance) components. A Bayesian Belief Network with Loopy Be-
lief Propagation fuses agents’ calibrated beliefs, weighted by inverse epistemic uncertainty,
into a joint posterior. Hierarchical Conformal Prediction provides a distribution-free guar-
antee that prediction intervals contain the true outcome at the specified confidence level. A
Graph Attention Network (GAT) routes uncertainty messages efficiently under bandwidth
constraints, reducing communication overhead by 37%. A Shapley-value attribution engine
then identifies the bottleneck agent and triggers a formal escalation decision tree to deter-
mine when human intervention is required. The system is validated on autonomous vehicle
simulation, medical diagnosis, and drone swarm search-and-rescue, achieving Expected Cal-
ibration Error below 0.05 and escalation F1 above 0.80 within a 100ms real-time budget.
Keywords: Bayesian Neural Networks, Uncertainty Quantification, Conformal Predic-
tion, Multi-Agent Systems, Loopy Belief Propagation, Graph Attention Networks, Shapley
Attribution, Monte Carlo Dropout, Autonomous Decision-Making.
=== PAGE 4 ===
Acknowledgement
I would like to thank my project guide, Prof. I. J. Shaikh, for her guidance and sup-
port. I will forever remain grateful for the constant support and guidance extended by my
guide, in making this project phase I report. Through our many discussions, she helped me
toformand solidify ideas. The invaluablediscussionsIhad withherandmyteamcolleagues,
the penetrating questions he has put to me and the constant motivation, has all led to the
development of the ideas presented in this project phase I report.
I would also like to thank my wonderful colleagues, parents and friends for lis-
tening my ideas, asking questions and providing feedback and suggestions for improving my
ideas.
Komal Sunil Shinde
=== PAGE 5 ===
Contents
1 Introduction 1
1.1 Project Idea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1.2 Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.3 Literature Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2 Problem Definition and Scope 5
2.1 Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
3 Methodology 8
3.1 Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
4 Outcome 11
4.1 Type of Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
4.2 Expected Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
5 Project Plan 14
5.1 Project Timeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
5.2 Team Organisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
6 Experimental setup 17
6.1 Data Set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
6.2 Technology Used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
6.3 Performance Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
7 PO & PSO Mapping 19
7.1 Program Outcome (PO) Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
7.2 Program Specific Outcome (PSO) Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
8 Summary 24
=== PAGE 6 ===
List of Figures
3.1 COGNIX - Overall System Block Diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
3.2 COGNIX - Uncertainty Detection Engine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
=== PAGE 7 ===
List of Tables
5.1 Project Timeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
7.1 Program Outcomes (PO) Mapping – Cognix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
7.2 Program Specific Outcomes (PSO) Mapping – Cognix . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
=== PAGE 8 ===
Chapter: 1
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1 Project Idea
In recent years, artificial intelligence has become a core component of critical systems
such as autonomous vehicles, healthcare diagnostics, financial forecasting, and industrial au-
tomation. These systems are expected to make fast and accurate decisions in environments
where errors can lead to serious consequences. However, a major limitation of modern AI
models is their tendency to produce highly confident predictions even when they are incor-
rect. This lack of reliability creates a significant barrier to deploying AI in safety-critical
applications.
Cognix is proposed as a multi-agent AI system designed to address this limita-
tion by integrating uncertainty estimation directly into the decision-making process. Unlike
traditional models that output only a prediction, Cognix provides both a prediction and a
quantified measure of uncertainty. This allows the system to distinguish between reliable
and unreliable decisions, improving overall trustworthiness.
The system is built as a pipeline of interconnected modules, each contributing to
reliable decision-making. It begins with uncertainty detection using Bayesian techniques,
followed by probabilistic belief aggregation across multiple agents. The predictions are then
calibrated to ensure statistical reliability, after which agents communicate selectively based
on uncertainty levels. Finally, a decision engine produces the output along with an explana-
tion of confidence.
The key technologies that power Cognix include:
• BayesianNeuralNetworks(BNN):Usedfordecomposinguncertaintyintoaleatoric
and epistemic components, enabling a deeper understanding of prediction reliability.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 1
=== PAGE 9 ===
Chapter: 1
• Multi-Agent Systems: Multiple agents independently process data and collaborate
to improve robustness and reduce single-point failure.
• Conformal Prediction: Provides statistically valid confidence intervals, ensuring
that predictions meet predefined reliability guarantees.
• Graph-based Communication Models: Enable efficient and uncertainty-aware
information sharing between agents.
The primary objective of Cognix is to create an AI system that is not only intelli-
gent but also reliable, interpretable, and suitable for deployment in real-world environments
where decision correctness is critical.
1.2 Motivation
The development of Cognix is driven by the increasing reliance on artificial intelli-
gence in real-world applications and the risks associated with unreliable or overconfident
predictions. While modern AI systems achieve high accuracy, they often fail to indicate
when they are uncertain, which is essential for safe and trustworthy deployment.
The key factors motivating this project are:
1. Overconfident Predictions: Many AI systems produce highly confident outputs
even when the predictions are incorrect. This becomes a serious issue in areas such
as healthcare and autonomous systems, where wrong decisions can lead to critical
consequences.
2. Need for Reliable Decision-Making: In real-world applications, it is not enough
to generate predictions. Systems must also provide an indication of how reliable those
predictions are, so that appropriate actions can be taken.
3. Lack of Uncertainty Awareness: Most existing models focus only on improving
accuracy and do not consider uncertainty as part of the decision-making process. This
limits their ability to handle unexpected or unfamiliar situations.
4. Complexity of Multi-Agent Systems: Modernapplicationsinvolvemultipleagents
workingtogether, suchasinautonomousvehiclesordistributedsensornetworks. These
systems require proper handling of uncertainty across all agents to make consistent and
safe decisions.
5. Advancements in Technology: With the availability of modern machine learning
frameworks, computational power, and simulation tools, it is now possible to design
systems that can explicitly model and use uncertainty in decision-making.
The motivation behind Cognix is to develop a system that not only improves
prediction accuracy but also makes the decision-making process more reliable, transparent,
and suitable for real-world deployment.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 2
=== PAGE 10 ===
Chapter: 1
1.3 Literature Survey
A substantial amount of research has been conducted in the areas of uncertainty es-
timation, probabilistic learning, and multi-agent systems. These studies provide a strong
foundation but also reveal key limitations that motivate the development of Cognix.
Early work in probabilistic machine learning by Bishop [2] and Murphy [22] es-
tablished the theoretical basis for modeling uncertainty in predictions. Bayesian Neural
Networks, introduced by Neal [21], further extended these ideas by placing probability dis-
tributions over model parameters, enabling principled uncertainty estimation.
In deep learning, Gal and Ghahramani [3] proposed Monte Carlo Dropout as an
approximation to Bayesian inference, while Lakshminarayanan et al. [4] introduced deep
ensembles for improved predictive uncertainty. Although effective, these methods either
approximate the posterior or require multiple models, limiting their efficiency in real-time
systems.
KendallandGal[13]highlightedtheimportanceofdistinguishingbetweenaleatoric
and epistemic uncertainty, particularly in computer vision tasks. This distinction is critical
for understanding whether uncertainty arises from the environment or the model itself. How-
ever, most implementations focus on single-agent systems and do not extend to collaborative
environments.
Calibration techniques such as those discussed by Guo et al. [5] and conformal
prediction methods introduced by Vovk et al. [7] provide statistical guarantees on prediction
reliability. Recent advancements [26] further improve the applicability of conformal methods
in modern machine learning systems.
Researchinmulti-agentsystems[17,19]explorescoordinationanddecision-making
across distributed agents. However, these approaches often assume deterministic predictions
and do not incorporate uncertainty as a first-class component of the system.
From the existing literature, it is evident that while uncertainty estimation, cal-
ibration, and multi-agent collaboration have been studied individually, there is a lack of
integrated systems that combine all three aspects.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 3
=== PAGE 11 ===
Chapter: 1
Cognix addresses this gap by proposing a unified framework that performs real-
time uncertainty decomposition, multi-agent belief aggregation, and calibrated decision-
making, making it suitable for deployment in complex real-world environments.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 4
=== PAGE 12 ===
Chapter: 2
Chapter 2
Problem Definition and Scope
2.1 Problem Statement
Artificial Intelligence systems are increasingly used in critical domains such as au-
tonomous vehicles, healthcare diagnostics, financial decision-making, and multi-robot sys-
tems. While these systems have achieved high accuracy, a major limitation still exists —
they often produce decisions without properly representing uncertainty. As a result, systems
may take incorrect actions with high confidence, which can lead to serious real-world conse-
quences.
Another key challenge arises in multi-agent environments, where multiple AI sys-
tems or sensors contribute to a shared decision. In such settings, there is no unified mech-
anism to quantify, combine, and interpret uncertainty across different agents. Existing ap-
proaches typically focus on single-model predictions and fail to address how uncertainty
should be communicated, calibrated, and used for decision-making in a distributed system.
Therefore, there is a need to design a system that not only generates predictions
but also provides reliable uncertainty estimates, combines information from multiple agents,
ensures calibrated confidence, and supports explainable decision-making. The Cognix sys-
tem aims to address this gap by developing a structured framework for uncertainty-aware
multi-agent decision systems.
2.1.1 Goals and Objectives
• Goals
1. Develop Cognix as a unified multi-agent decision system that incorporates uncer-
tainty awareness at every stage of processing.
2. Enable reliable and interpretable decision-making by integrating prediction, un-
certainty estimation, calibration, and explanation within a single framework.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 5
=== PAGE 13 ===
Chapter: 2
3. Improve safety and robustness of AI systems operating in real-world environments
by reducing overconfident incorrect decisions.
4. Build a scalable architecture that supports multiple agents and heterogeneous
data sources such as sensors, simulations, and real-world inputs.
• Objectives
1. FrameworkDevelopment: Designandimplementacomplete5-moduleBayesian
multi-agent system for end-to-end uncertainty quantification and decision- mak-
ing.
2. Uncertainty Modeling: Decompose uncertainty into aleatoric (irreducible data
noise) and epistemic (reducible model uncertainty) at the individual agent level.
3. Confidence Calibration: Provide mathematically guaranteed and reliable con-
fidence intervals using conformal prediction techniques.
4. Efficient Communication: Enable intelligent and uncertainty-aware commu-
nication between agents using Graph Neural Networks (GNNs).
5. Uncertainty Attribution:: Identifyandquantifythecontributionofeachagent
to overall system uncertainty using Shapley value-based methods.
6. Multi-Domain Validation: Evaluate system performance across real-world do-
mains such as autonomous driving (CARLA), medical diagnosis (CheXpert), and
drone swarm search rescue.
7. Regulatory Compliance: EnsurethesystemmeetsmodernAIsafetyandtrans-
parency standards such as ISO 26262, EU AI Act 2.0, and FDA guidelines.
2.1.2 Assumptions and Scope
• Assumptions
⋄ Data Availability: It is assumed that sufficient training and testing data is
available through simulation environments and real-world datasets.
⋄ Sensor Inputs: The system assumes that agents provide structured input data
such as images, numerical readings, or extracted features suitable for machine
learning models.
⋄ Computational Resources: It is assumed that adequate computational re-
sources are available for model training and real-time inference.
⋄ Model Generalization: The system assumes that models trained on simulation
data can generalize reasonably well to real-world scenarios.
• Scope
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 6
=== PAGE 14 ===
Chapter: 2
⋄ The project focuses on developing a multi-module AI system that integrates
uncertainty estimation, probabilistic reasoning, calibration, communication, and
decision-making.
⋄ Thesystemisdesignedformulti-agentenvironmentssuchasautonomousvehicles,
robotics, and distributed sensing systems.
⋄ Validation is carried out using simulation platforms and controlled experimental
setups.
⋄ The project emphasizes system design, model implementation, and evaluation
rather than large-scale industrial deployment.
⋄ The system outputs include predictions along with uncertainty measures and ex-
planations for decision-making.
⋄ User interface development and large-scale production deployment are not in-
cluded in the scope of this project.
By clearly defining the problem, goals, and scope, the Cognix system aims to
provide a reliable and structured approach for uncertainty-aware decision-making in modern
AI systems.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 7
=== PAGE 15 ===
Chapter: 3
Chapter 3
Methodology
3.1 Methodology
Refer to Fig. 3.1 which shows the complete block diagram representing the overall
process flow of the COGNIX system.
1. Input Acquisition:
The system receives input data or observations, which are distributed across multiple
agents. Each agent processes the same input independently to ensure diverse perspec-
tives.
2. Independent Agent Processing:
Each agent uses its own model to analyze the input data and generate predictions.
3. Uncertainty Estimation:
Alongwithpredictions,eachagentestimatesuncertaintyusingprobabilistictechniques,
considering both aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty.
4. Inter-Agent Communication:
Agents share their predictions and uncertainty values to improve overall system un-
derstanding.
5. Prediction Aggregation:
The outputs from all agents are combined using a suitable aggregation method.
6. Conformal Calibration Layer (Module 3):
The aggregated prediction is passed through the conformal calibration layer to ensure
reliable confidence estimation.
7. Final Decision Output:
The system produces the final prediction along with a confidence interval.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 8
=== PAGE 16 ===
Chapter: 3
Figure 3.1: COGNIX - Overall System Block Diagram
3.1.1 Uncertainty Detection Engine (Module 1)
Refer to Fig. 3.2 which illustrates the architecture of the Uncertainty Detection
Engine.
This module is responsible for estimating the reliability of predictions generated
by each agent. It operates at the initial stage of the pipeline and produces uncertainty-aware
outputs that are used in subsequent decision-making stages.
The system is based on a Bayesian Neural Network (BNN), which models uncer-
tainty by treating network parameters as probability distributions instead of fixed values.
This allows the system to generate both predictions and associated confidence measures.
Two types of uncertainty are considered:
• Aleatoric Uncertainty: Arises due to noise or randomness in input data.
• Epistemic Uncertainty: Arises due to limited knowledge of the model.
The detailed internal workflow, including prior modeling, variational learning,
sampling, and uncertainty decomposition, is represented in Fig. 3.2.
The output of this module is a structured tuple of the form (µ,σ ,σ ),
aleatoric epistemic
which is used for further aggregation and calibration.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 9
=== PAGE 17 ===
Chapter: 3
Figure 3.2: COGNIX - Uncertainty Detection Engine
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 10
=== PAGE 18 ===
Chapter: 4
Chapter 4
Outcome
4.1 Type of Project
The COGNIX project can be categorized as both application-oriented and research-oriented,
with a strong focus on improving prediction reliability through calibration techniques.
• Application-Oriented:
Thesystemisdesignedtobeusedinreal-worldscenarioswherereliabledecision-
making is important. The Conformal Calibration Layer ensures that predictions are
accompanied by meaningful confidence intervals.
• Research-Oriented:
The project explores the application of conformal prediction in a multi-agent envi-
ronment. Extending calibration from single models to multiple interacting agents adds
a research dimension to the work.
• AI and Machine Learning Domain:
The project uses concepts from machine learning, uncertainty estimation, and sta-
tistical calibration to improve system performance.
• The main outcomes of the Conformal Calibration Layer are:
– Improved Reliability: Predictionsarenolongeroverconfidentandbetterreflect
actual performance.
– Confidence Guarantees: The system maintains a predefined confidence level
(e.g., 95%).
– Better Decision-Making: The system can identify uncertain cases and avoid
risky decisions.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 11
=== PAGE 19 ===
Chapter: 4
– Enhanced Interpretability: Users can understand how confident the system is
about its predictions.
4.2 Expected Outcomes
4.2.1 Input and Output Format
The input to Module 1 is the raw sensor observation collected from an agent in the
system. This may include data from different sources such as camera, lidar, or radar.
Input:
{
agent_id: 3,
observation: [sensor readings from camera / lidar / radar]
}
The Uncertainty Detection Engine processes this input using a Bayesian Neural
Network to estimate both the prediction and its associated uncertainties. The system sepa-
rates uncertainty into aleatoric (due to data noise) and epistemic (due to lack of knowledge).
The output of Module 1 is a structured uncertainty representation for each agent:
Output:
{
agent_id: 3,
prediction_mu: 0.72,
sigma_aleatoric: 0.15,
sigma_epistemic: 0.09,
total_uncertainty: 0.24
}
This output is forwarded to the next modules in the Cognix system, where it is
used for belief aggregation and decision-making. By providing separate uncertainty values,
the module ensures that later stages can interpret predictions more effectively.
4.2.2 Expected Performance
The module is expected to achieve reliable uncertainty decomposition with high accu-
racyandlowlatency. Thesystemaimstomaintaindecompositionaccuracyabove85percent
while ensuring that inference time per agent remains within 5 milliseconds. It should also be
capable of detecting out-of-distribution scenarios and maintaining stable predictions across
multiple runs.
4.2.3 Key Outcomes
The main outcomes of Module 1 are as follows:
• Structured Uncertainty Output: The system provides clear separation of predic-
tion, aleatoric uncertainty, and epistemic uncertainty for each agent.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 12
=== PAGE 20 ===
Chapter: 4
• Improved Decision Support: By distinguishing between different types of uncer-
tainty, the system enables better decision-making in uncertain situations.
• Real-Time Performance: The module operates within strict time constraints, mak-
ing it suitable for real-world applications.
• Better Interpretability: The output allows users and downstream modules to un-
derstand the source of uncertainty in predictions.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 13
=== PAGE 21 ===
Chapter: 5
Chapter 5
Project Plan
5.1 Project Timeline
2026
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
ProjectTimeline
1. InitialPlanningandRequirementGathering
2. ResearchandTechnologySelection
3. DatasetCollectionandPreprocessing
4. PrototypeDevelopmentandPoC
5. TestingandValidation
6. FinalImplementationandDeployment
7. Documentation
Table 5.1: Project Timeline
5.2 Team Organisation
The Cognix project is developed by a team of four members, each responsible for specific
modules of the complete system.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 14
=== PAGE 22 ===
Chapter: 5
5.2.1 Team Structure
1. Komal — Module 1: Uncertainty Detection Engine
Komal is responsible for designing and implementing the Bayesian Neural Network-
based uncertainty decomposition pipeline that forms the foundation of the entire Cog-
nix system.
Key Responsibilities:
⋄ Aleatoric and Epistemic Uncertainty Decomposition using BNN
⋄ Variational Inference training with ELBO loss
⋄ Posterior sampling pipeline (S=50 weight samples)
⋄ Structured output tuple generation (µ, σ , σ )
a e
⋄ CARLA simulation scenario design for validation
⋄ DuckieBot hardware latency testing and optimisation
⋄ Literature review for uncertainty detection methods
2. Aryan — Module 2: Bayesian Belief Network
Aryan is responsible for multi-agent probabilistic belief fusion using Loopy Belief Prop-
agation, weighted by epistemic uncertainty from Module 1.
Key Responsibilities:
⋄ Bayesian Belief Network design and implementation
⋄ Loopy Belief Propagation algorithm
⋄ Epistemic-uncertainty-weighted message passing
⋄ Convergence testing and collective posterior computation
3. Aditya — Module 3: Conformal Calibration Engine
Adityaisresponsibleforprovidingstatisticalguaranteesonpredictionreliabilitythrough
conformal calibration techniques.
Key Responsibilities:
⋄ Conformal Prediction implementation with coverage guarantees
⋄ Calibration of uncertainty outputs from Module 1 and Module 2
⋄ Two-stage hierarchical calibration (individual and collective)
⋄ Non-conformity score computation and threshold selection
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 15
=== PAGE 23 ===
Chapter: 5
4. Zaid — Module 4 and 5: Communication and Decision Engine
Zaid is responsible for efficient inter-agent uncertainty communication and final risk-
aware decision making with attribution.
Key Responsibilities:
⋄ Graph Attention Network for uncertainty-aware communication
⋄ Bandwidth-constrained message selection protocol
⋄ Task-specific decision threshold design
⋄ Shapley value-based uncertainty attribution per agent
⋄ Escalation decision tree implementation
⋄ Final decision output formatting and logging
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 16
=== PAGE 24 ===
Chapter: 6
Chapter 6
Experimental setup
In order to evaluate the performance of the COGNIX system, a controlled experi-
mental setup was designed. The aim was to analyze not only prediction accuracy but also
the reliability and calibration of outputs. The system was tested under different conditions
to understand how well it handles uncertainty in a multi-agent environment. The follow-
ing sections describe the dataset, technologies used, and performance parameters considered
during evaluation.
6.1 Data Set
Synthetic and Benchmark Dataset
• Source: Combination of synthetically generated data and standard machine learning
benchmark datasets.
• Formats: Structured numerical data along with simulated observations representing
different agent inputs.
• Content Variety:
⋄ Regression-based data for continuous prediction tasks
⋄ Classification scenarios with probabilistic outputs
⋄ Simulated multi-agent observations with varying uncertainty levels
6.2 Technology Used
• Machine Learning Framework:
⋄ PyTorch for building and training predictive models
• Uncertainty Estimation:
⋄ Monte Carlo Dropout and ensemble-based techniques for estimating uncertainty
• Calibration Layer:
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 17
=== PAGE 25 ===
Chapter: 6
⋄ Conformal Prediction implemented as a post-processing step for generating cali-
brated intervals
• Backend & Processing:
⋄ Python 3.x for overall system implementation
⋄ NumPy and Pandas for data manipulation and processing
• Development Tools:
⋄ Git for version control and collaboration
⋄ Jupyter Notebook for experimentation and analysis
6.3 Performance Parameters
To evaluate the effectiveness of the system, both prediction performance and calibra-
tion quality were measured. The following parameters were considered:
• Prediction Accuracy:
– Measures how close the predicted values are to actual values
– Used standard metrics such as Mean Squared Error (MSE) or accuracy for clas-
sification
• Calibration Accuracy:
– Evaluates how well the predicted confidence matches actual correctness
– Goal: Confidence levels should align with real-world outcomes
• Coverage:
– Percentage of true values that lie within the predicted confidence interval
– Target: Coverage close to predefined confidence level (e.g., 95%)
• Prediction Interval Width:
– Measures the size of the confidence interval
– Narrower intervals with correct coverage indicate better performance
• Computation Time:
– Time required to generate predictions and calibration intervals
– Evaluated to ensure system efficiency
• System Reliability:
– Measures consistency of predictions across different agents
– Helps in evaluating robustness of multi-agent decision-making
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 18
=== PAGE 26 ===
Chapter: 7
Chapter 7
PO & PSO Mapping
7.1 Program Outcome (PO) Mapping
PO Description Level Justification
PO1 Engineering Knowledge: 3 Cognix applies advanced
Apply knowledge of math- mathematics including
ematics, science, and engi- Bayesian inference, prob-
neering fundamentals to AI ability distributions, Vari-
and DS problems. ational Inference, ELBO
loss, Shapley values, graph
theory, and conformal
prediction to solve complex
multi-agent uncertainty
quantification problems.
PO2 Problem Analysis: Iden- 3 The core problem of over-
tify, formulate, and ana- confident AI systems was
lyze complex problems us- identified, formally defined,
ing principles of math, nat- and analyzed through a re-
ural science, and engineer- view of three recent IEEE
ing. papers, reaching the sub-
stantiated conclusion that
aleatoric and epistemic un-
certainty must be separated
in real-time multi-agent set-
tings.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 19
=== PAGE 27 ===
Chapter: 7
PO3 Design/Development of 3 A complete five module
Solutions: Design sys- system was designed ad-
tem components or pro- dressing public safety, au-
cesses considering societal, tonomous driving, medical
safety, and environmental diagnosis, financial trading
factors. with appropriate considera-
tion for regulatory compli-
ance including ISO 26262
and EU AI Act 2.0.
PO4 Conduct Investigations 3 Experiments are designed
of Complex Problems: using CARLA simulator
Conduct research based in- across four uncertainty
vestigations, design exper- scenario categories, with
iments, analyze data, and analysis of decomposition
synthesize conclusions. accuracy, ECE, latency,
and OOD detection all
grounded in research based
investigation methodology.
PO5 Modern Tool Usage: 3 PyTorch 2.0.1, Pyro,
Create and apply mod- BayesianTorch, CARLA
ern tools, modeling, and 0.9.14, PettingZoo, Duck-
engineering techniques. ieBot, PyTorch Geometric,
TorchScript, and Weights
and Biases are all applied
extensively across the
Cognix system.
PO6 The Engineer and So- 3 Cognix directly addresses
ciety: Apply contextual societal safety, autonomous
knowledge to societal, vehicle accidents, medical
health, safety, legal, and AI misdiagnosis, financial
cultural issues. flash crashes and aligns
with legal regulatory re-
quirements of ISO 26262,
EU AI Act 2.0, and FDA
2026 guidelines.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 20
=== PAGE 28 ===
Chapter: 7
PO7 Ethics: Apply ethical prin- 3 Cognix is fundamentally
ciples and commit to pro- motivated by the ethical
fessional ethics and respon- responsibility of deploying
sibilities. AI in safety-critical do-
mains. The system ensures
AI is transparent and hon-
est about its confidence, not
overconfident before mak-
ing decisions affecting hu-
man lives.
PO8 Individual and Team 3 Cognix is developed by a
Work: Function effectively four member team with
as an individual and in each member owning one
teams. module functioning effec-
tively both individually and
collaboratively in a multi-
disciplinary AI and robotics
project.
PO9 Communication Skills: 3 Technical documentation,
Communicate effectively on IEEE literature review,
complex engineering activi- seminar report, and PPT
ties. presentation were all pre-
pared, communicating
complex uncertainty quan-
tification concepts clearly
to both technical and
non-technical audiences.
PO10 Project Management 3 The project was structured
and Finance: Apply across eight phases with
project management and clear module-wise division
financial principles in of work, timelines, integra-
engineering work. tion milestones, and hard-
ware procurement planning
for DuckieBot and CARLA
infrastructure.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 21
=== PAGE 29 ===
Chapter: 7
PO11 Life-long Learning: Rec- 3 The team independently
ognize the need for life-long studied cutting edge re-
learning amidst technologi- search from 2022 to 2025
cal change. on Bayesian Neural Net-
works, conformal predic-
tion, and graph-based un-
certainty communication all
topics beyond standard cur-
riculum demonstrating self
directed life long learning.
Table 7.1: Program Outcomes (PO) Mapping – Cognix
7.2 Program Specific Outcome (PSO) Mapping
PSO Description Mapping Justification
Number Level
PSO1 Interpret data and apply 3 Cognix interprets multi-
Artificial Intelligence al- modal sensor data from
gorithms to provide solu- camera, LIDAR, and
tions. radar agents and ap-
plies Bayesian Neural
Networks, Graph Neural
Networks, Loopy Be-
lief Propagation, and
conformal prediction al-
gorithms to provide safe
and calibrated solutions
for multi-agent decision
making in autonomous
driving, medical diag-
nosis, and distributed
robotics.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 22
=== PAGE 30 ===
Chapter: 7
PSO2 Apply standard prac- 3 Standard Bayesian infer-
tices, strategies and ence practices, Shapley
use appropriate models value attribution analy-
of data analytics to sis, and Expected Cal-
discover knowledge. ibration Error evalua-
tion strategies are ap-
plied to multi-agent sen-
sor data to discover ac-
tionable knowledge —
identifying which agents
are reliable, which uncer-
tainty sources can be re-
duced, and which scenar-
ios require human inter-
vention.
Table 7.2: Program Specific Outcomes (PSO) Mapping – Cognix
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 23
=== PAGE 31 ===
Chapter: 8
Chapter 8
Summary
Cognix is designed to solve a problem that existing AI systems largely ignore the
inability to explain why they are uncertain and what should be done about it. The system
operates across five interconnected modules, where each agent first decomposes its sensor
observations into two distinct uncertainty components, fuses its beliefs with neighbouring
agents through probabilistic message passing, receives a mathematically guaranteed calibra-
tion ensuring stated confidence levels are accurate, communicates only the most informative
uncertainty signals to other agents through a learned graph-based protocol, and finally re-
ceives a complete decision output that not only recommends an action but also identifies
which specific agent is the weakest link in the collective reasoning chain. Applied to au-
tonomous driving, medical diagnosis, and multi-robot coordination, Cognix moves AI de-
cision making away from blind confidence toward a model of structured and explainable
self-awareness, where every prediction carries a justified level of trust rather than an arbi-
trary score.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 24
=== PAGE 32 ===
Chapter: 8
References
[1] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2016.
[2] C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Springer, 2006.
[3] Y. Gal and Z. Ghahramani, ”Dropout as a Bayesian Approximation: Representing
Model Uncertainty in Deep Learning,” in ICML, 2016.
[4] B. Lakshminarayanan, A. Pritzel, and C. Blundell, ”Simple and Scalable Predictive
Uncertainty Estimation using Deep Ensembles,” in NeurIPS, 2017.
[5] C. Guo, G. Pleiss, Y. Sun, and K. Q. Weinberger, ”On Calibration of Modern Neural
Networks,” in ICML, 2017.
[6] J. Platt, ”Probabilistic Outputs for Support Vector Machines,” 1999.
[7] V. Vovk, A. Gammerman, and G. Shafer, Algorithmic Learning in a Random World.
Springer, 2005.
[8] A. N. Angelopoulos and S. Bates, ”A Gentle Introduction to Conformal Prediction and
Distribution-Free Uncertainty Quantification,” 2021.
[9] Y. Romano, E. Patterson, and E. Cand`es, ”Conformalized Quantile Regression,” in
NeurIPS, 2019.
[10] J. Lei et al., ”Distribution-Free Predictive Inference for Regression,” JASA, 2018.
[11] V. Kuleshov, N. Fenner, and S. Ermon, ”Accurate Uncertainties for Deep Learning
Using Calibrated Regression,” in ICML, 2018.
[12] M. Abdar et al., ”A Review of Uncertainty Quantification in Deep Learning,” Informa-
tion Fusion, 2021.
[13] A. Kendall and Y. Gal, ”What Uncertainties Do We Need in Bayesian Deep Learning
for Computer Vision?” in NeurIPS, 2017.
[14] T. G. Dietterich, ”Ensemble Methods in Machine Learning,” in Multiple Classifier Sys-
tems, 2000.
[15] Z.-H. Zhou, Ensemble Methods: Foundations and Algorithms. CRC Press, 2012.
[16] L. Busoniu, R. Babuˇska, and B. De Schutter, ”A Comprehensive Survey of Multiagent
,
Reinforcement Learning,” IEEE TSMC, 2008.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 25
=== PAGE 33 ===
Chapter: 8
[17] F. A. Oliehoek and C. Amato, A Concise Introduction to Decentralized POMDPs.
Springer, 2016.
[18] P. Stone and M. Veloso, ”Multiagent Systems: A Survey from a Machine Learning
Perspective,” Autonomous Robots, 2000.
[19] K. Zhang et al., ”Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning: A Selective Overview,” IEEE
TNNLS, 2021.
[20] M. Sensoy, L. Kaplan, and M. Kandemir, ”Evidential Deep Learning to Quantify Clas-
sification Uncertainty,” in NeurIPS, 2018.
[21] R. M. Neal, Bayesian Learning for Neural Networks. Springer, 1995.
[22] K. P. Murphy, Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective. MIT Press, 2012.
[23] C. M. Bishop, ”Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Science and
Statistics),” 2007.
[24] G. Shafer and V. Vovk, ”A Tutorial on Conformal Prediction,” JMLR, 2008.
[25] H. Papadopoulos et al., ”Inductive Confidence Machines for Regression,” ECML, 2002.
[26] A. Angelopoulos et al., ”Conformal Prediction: A Unified Review,” Foundations and
Trends in ML, 2023.
[27] Y. Liu et al., ”A Survey on Deep Learning-Based Uncertainty Estimation,” 2020.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 26