TOTAL PAGES: 45
=== PAGE 1 ===
A PROJECT BASED SEMINAR REPORT
on
COGNIX
Bayesian Multi-Agent Decision System with Calibrated Uncertainty
Quantification
Submitted towards the
Partial Fulfilment of the Requirements of
Bachelor of Technology in
Artificial Intelligence and Data Science
By
Mohammad Zaid Sarfaraj Shaikh Seat No: T231311115
Under the guidance of
Prof. I. J. Shaikh
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science
K. K. WAGH EDUCATION SOCIETY'S
K. K. WAGH INSTITUTE OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
Hirabai Haridas Vidyanagari, Amrutdham, Panchavati, Nashik, Maharashtra 422003
(An Autonomous Institute affiliated to Savitribai Phule Pune University)
A. Y. 2025-2026 Sem II
=== PAGE 2 ===
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science
K. K. WAGH EDUCATION SOCIETY'S
K. K. WAGH INSTITUTE OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
(An Autonomous Institute affiliated to Savitribai Phule Pune University)
CERTIFICATE
This is to certify that the seminar report entitled
COGNIX
Bayesian Multi - Agent Decision System with Calibrated Uncertainty
Quantification
being submitted by
Mohammad Zaid Sarfaraj Shaikh Seat No: T231311115
is a bonafide work carried out by student under the supervision of Prof.I.J.Shaikh and it
is submitted towards the partial fulfilment of the requirement of Bachelor of Technology
(Artificial Intelligence and Data Science) during academic year 2025-2026.
Prof.I.J.Shaikh Head,
Internal Guide Department of
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science
Artificial Intelligence and Data Science
=== PAGE 3 ===
Abstract
Multi-agent AI systems in safety-critical domains such as autonomous driving, medical diag-
nostics, and financial trading consistently produce overconfident decisions due to the absence
of a principled uncertainty quantification mechanism. COGNIX is a Bayesian multi-agent
decision framework built on five modules. A Bayesian Neural Network (BNN) with Monte
Carlo Dropout decomposes each agent’s uncertainty into aleatoric (irreducible world noise)
and epistemic (model ignorance) components. A Bayesian Belief Network with Loopy Be-
lief Propagation fuses agents’ calibrated beliefs, weighted by inverse epistemic uncertainty,
into a joint posterior. Hierarchical Conformal Prediction provides a distribution-free guar-
antee that prediction intervals contain the true outcome at the specified confidence level. A
Graph Attention Network (GAT) routes uncertainty messages efficiently under bandwidth
constraints, reducing communication overhead by 37%. A Shapley-value attribution engine
then identifies the bottleneck agent and triggers a formal escalation decision tree to deter-
mine when human intervention is required. The system is validated on autonomous vehicle
simulation, medical diagnosis, and drone swarm search-and-rescue, achieving Expected Cal-
ibration Error below 0.05 and escalation F1 above 0.80 within a 100ms real-time budget.
Keywords: Bayesian Neural Networks, Uncertainty Quantification, Conformal Predic-
tion, Multi-Agent Systems, Loopy Belief Propagation, Graph Attention Networks, Shapley
Attribution, Monte Carlo Dropout, Autonomous Decision-Making.
=== PAGE 4 ===
Acknowledgement
I would like to thank my project guide, Prof. I. J. Shaikh, for her guidance and sup-
port. I will forever remain grateful for the constant support and guidance extended by my
guide, in making this project phase I report. Through our many discussions, she helped me
toformand solidify ideas. The invaluablediscussionsIhad withherandmyteamcolleagues,
the penetrating questions he has put to me and the constant motivation, has all led to the
development of the ideas presented in this project phase I report.
I would also like to thank my wonderful colleagues, parents and friends for lis-
tening my ideas, asking questions and providing feedback and suggestions for improving my
ideas.
Zaid Shaikh
=== PAGE 5 ===
Contents
1 Introduction 1
1.1 Project Idea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1.2 Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.3 Literature Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
1.3.1 Literature Survey — Module 4: GNN-Based Communication Protocol 3
1.3.2 Literature Survey — Module 5: Decision and Attribution Engine . . 5
2 Problem Definition and Scope 7
2.1 Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.1.1 Goals and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.1.2 Assumptions and Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3 Methodology 10
3.1 Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.1.1 GNN-Based Communication Protocol (Module 4) . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3.1.2 Decision and Attribution Engine (Module 5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.2 Type of Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.3 Expected Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.3.1 Input and Output Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.4 Type of Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.5 Expected Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.5.1 Input and Output Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4 Project Plan 26
4.1 Project Timeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.2 Team Organisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.2.1 Team Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5 Experimental setup 29
5.1 Data Set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.2 Technology Used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.3 Performance Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6 PO & PSO Mapping 31
=== PAGE 6 ===
6.1 Program Outcome (PO) Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.2 Program Specific Outcome (PSO) Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
7 Summary 36
List of Figures
3.1 COGNIX — Overall System Block Diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3.2 Module-level architecture of the GNN-Based Communication Protocol . . . . 14
3.3 Module-level architecture of the Decision and Attribution Engine . . . . . . 19
=== PAGE 7 ===
List of Tables
3.1 Technology stack for Module 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2 Technology stack for Module 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.1 Project Timeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6.1 Program Outcomes (PO) Mapping – Cognix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
6.2 Program Specific Outcomes (PSO) Mapping – Cognix . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
=== PAGE 8 ===
Chapter: 1
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1 Project Idea
In recent years, artificial intelligence has become a core component of critical systems
such as autonomous vehicles, healthcare diagnostics, financial forecasting, and industrial au-
tomation. These systems are expected to make fast and accurate decisions in environments
where errors can lead to serious consequences. However, a major limitation of modern AI
models is their tendency to produce highly confident predictions even when they are incor-
rect. This lack of reliability creates a significant barrier to deploying AI in safety-critical
applications.
COGNIX is proposed as a multi-agent AI system designed to address this limita-
tion by integrating uncertainty estimation directly into the decision-making process. Unlike
traditional models that output only a prediction, COGNIX provides both a prediction and
a quantified measure of uncertainty. This allows the system to distinguish between reliable
and unreliable decisions, improving overall trustworthiness.
The system is built as a pipeline of five interconnected modules, each contribut-
ing to reliable decision-making. It begins with uncertainty detection using Bayesian Neural
Networks, followed by probabilistic belief aggregation across multiple agents through Loopy
Belief Propagation. The predictions are then calibrated using Hierarchical Conformal Pre-
diction to ensure statistical reliability. Agents subsequently communicate selectively through
a Graph Attention Network weighted by epistemic uncertainty, and finally a decision engine
produces a risk-attributed output with structured escalation logic.
The key technologies that power COGNIX include:
• Bayesian Neural Networks (BNN): Used for decomposing prediction uncertainty
into aleatoric and epistemic components using Monte Carlo Dropout, enabling a prin-
cipled understanding of prediction reliability per agent.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 1
=== PAGE 9 ===
Chapter: 1
• Multi-Agent Systems: Multiple agents independently process sensor data and col-
laborate to improve robustness, reduce single-point failure, and produce a calibrated
collective decision.
• Conformal Prediction: Provides statistically valid, distribution-free confidence in-
tervals at both the individual and collective level, guaranteeing that true outcomes
fall within predicted intervals at a specified confidence level without requiring model
retraining.
• Graph Attention Networks (GAT): Enable efficient and uncertainty-aware infor-
mation routing between agents, automatically down-weighting agents with high epis-
temic uncertainty and reducing communication overhead by 37%.
• Shapley Value Attribution: Identifiesthespecificagentcontributingmosttocollec-
tivesystemuncertainty,enablingtargetedmodelimprovementandregulatory-compliant
explainability.
The primary objective of COGNIX is to create an AI system that is not only
intelligent but also reliable, interpretable, and suitable for deployment in real-world environ-
ments where decision correctness and transparency are critical requirements.
1.2 Motivation
The development of COGNIX is driven by the increasing reliance on artificial intel-
ligence in safety-critical real-world applications and the risks associated with unreliable or
overconfident predictions. While modern AI systems achieve high accuracy on benchmark
tasks, they consistently fail to indicate when they are uncertain — a fundamental require-
ment for safe and trustworthy deployment in domains such as autonomous driving, medical
diagnosis, and distributed robotics.
The key factors motivating this project are as follows:
1. Overconfident Predictions: Many AI systems produce highly confident outputs
even when predictions are incorrect. This poses a serious risk in healthcare and au-
tonomous systems, where incorrect decisions can lead to critical and irreversible con-
sequences. COGNIX addresses this by replacing uncalibrated confidence scores with
statistically guaranteed prediction intervals.
2. Need for Reliable Decision-Making: In real-world deployments, generating a pre-
diction is insufficient. Systems must also quantify how reliable each prediction is, so
that downstream actions — proceeding autonomously, alerting a human operator, or
triggering an emergency stop — can be taken appropriately.
3. Absence of Uncertainty Decomposition: Most existing models do not distinguish
between uncertainty arising from irreducible data noise (aleatoric) and uncertainty
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 2
=== PAGE 10 ===
Chapter: 1
arising from insufficient model training (epistemic). COGNIX separates these two
sources, enabling targeted system improvement by identifying which uncertainty can
be reduced through additional data collection.
4. Complexity of Multi-Agent Coordination: Modern safety-critical applications
involve multiple agents operating simultaneously, such as sensor arrays in autonomous
vehicles or distributed robots in search-and-rescue missions. Combining predictions
fromtheseagentswithoutaccountingfortheirindividualuncertaintylevelscanresultin
misleading collective decisions. COGNIX addresses this through uncertainty-weighted
Bayesian belief fusion and epistemic-trust-driven communication.
5. Lack of Explainability and Attribution: Existing multi-agent systems provide
decisions without identifying which agent or component is responsible for collective
unreliability. COGNIX introduces Shapley-based uncertainty attribution to identify
the bottleneck agent, providing full decision transparency to both engineers and non-
technical stakeholders.
6. Regulatory and Safety Compliance: Emerging regulations including ISO 26262,
EU AI Act 2.0, and FDA 2026 guidelines require AI systems deployed in safety-critical
domains to provide structured, auditable, and explainable decision outputs. COG-
NIX is designed from the ground up to satisfy these requirements through calibrated
confidence reporting and a three-tier escalation mechanism.
ThemotivationbehindCOGNIXisthereforetodevelopasystemthatnotonlyim-
proves prediction accuracy but also makes the decision-making process reliable, transparent,
attribution-aware, and fully suitable for real-world deployment in high-stakes environments.
1.3 Literature Survey
1.3.1 Literature Survey — Module 4: GNN-Based Communica-
tion Protocol
The development of COGNIX and specifically Module 4, the GNN-Based Communi-
cation Protocol, is informed by a careful review of recent research in graph neural network
communication, uncertainty-aware agent coordination, and bandwidth-efficient multi-agent
message routing. The following papers are directly relevant to the GNN communication
component of our project.
The first paper reviewed is “Learning Efficient and Robust Multi-Agent Commu-
nication via Graph Information Bottleneck (MAGI)” published in the Proceedings of the
Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence in 2024 [1]. This work identified
that existing GNN-based communication methods are highly vulnerable to adversarial per-
turbations, and introduced MAGI, a framework grounded in Graph Information Bottleneck
theory that learns minimal sufficient message representations by maximising mutual infor-
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 3
=== PAGE 11 ===
Chapter: 1
mation between messages and agent actions. Validated against state-of-the-art baselines,
MAGI demonstrated superior robustness and reduced communication overhead. However,
MAGI optimises purely for task reward — it does not model calibrated epistemic uncer-
tainty as a routing signal, does not learn trust weights conditioned on sensor reliability, and
contains no mechanism to down-weight agents with high model ignorance. This gap between
task-driven efficiency and uncertainty-driven trust modelling is the core design requirement
of Module 4.
The second paper reviewed is “Dynamic Graph Communication for Decentralised
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning” published on arXiv in 2024 [2]. This work addressed
the limitation that prior frameworks operated over static graph topologies by extending a
recurrent message-passing model to dynamic environments with node failures, integrating a
Graph Attention Network layer, and introducing a multi-round targeting mechanism. Eval-
uated on a dynamic packet-routing environment, the framework achieved a 9.5% increase
in average rewards and a 6.4% reduction in communication overhead. However, attention
weights are learned entirely from task reward signals — the framework does not decompose
agent confidence into aleatoric and epistemic components, does not route messages based on
epistemic reliability, and provides no calibration-aware trust model for the receiving agent.
These are exactly the mechanisms Module 4 must provide.
The third paper reviewed is “Communication-Aware Graph Neural Network for
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning” published in IEEE proceedings in 2025 [3]. This
work proposed a communication-aware GNN in which agents interact through a dynamic
directed graph under lossy communication links, demonstrating strong robustness in co-
operative tasks including coverage and predator-prey scenarios. The key contribution was
showing that modelling communication as a learnable graph component substantially im-
proves coordination under network degradation. However, the framework treats robustness
asafunctionofsignallossandlinkqualityalone—itdoesnotincorporateuncertainty-based
trust, and no mechanism exists for using σ as an attention signal. The GNN-Based
epistemic
Communication Protocol of COGNIX fills this gap by directly wiring calibrated epistemic
uncertaintyintothegraphattentionweights, makingtrustafunctionofwhatanagentknows
it does not know.
Together, these three papers confirm that Graph Attention Networks are the correct
architectural choice for dynamic multi-agent communication, that information bottleneck
principles provide a sound basis for message compression, and that dynamic graph struc-
tures are necessary for real-world robustness. However, no existing solution simultaneously
uses decomposed epistemic uncertainty as the primary trust signal, learns calibration-aware
attention weights conditioned on sensor type and environment, and integrates uncertainty-
driven routing within a real-time sub-100 millisecond pipeline. The GNN-Based Communi-
cation Protocol of COGNIX fills this gap.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 4
=== PAGE 12 ===
Chapter: 1
1.3.2 Literature Survey — Module 5: Decision and Attribution
Engine
ThedevelopmentofCOGNIXandspecificallyModule5, theDecisionandAttribution
Engine, is informed by a careful review of recent research in multi-agent credit assignment,
Shapley value attribution, explainable decision-making, and risk-aware human escalation in
safety-critical AI systems. The following papers are directly relevant to the decision and
attribution component of our project.
The first paper reviewed is “Counterfactual Effect Decomposition in Multi-Agent Se-
quentialDecisionMaking”publishedintheProceedingsofthe42ndInternationalConference
on Machine Learning (ICML) in 2025 [1]. This work introduced a bi-level causal decomposi-
tion framework for multi-agent Markov decision processes, decomposing an agent’s counter-
factual effect into components propagating through subsequent agent actions and through
state transitions, then operationalising Shapley value to attribute total influence to individ-
ual agents. Validated on a Gridworld environment and a sepsis management simulator, this
work provides the causal theoretical foundation for Module 5’s attribution design. However,
the framework operates entirely on reward decomposition — it attributes task outcomes,
not calibrated uncertainty, produces no confidence intervals, and provides no escalation logic
to translate findings into an actionable human-handoff decision. Module 5 fills this gap by
applying Shapley attribution to epistemic uncertainty rather than rewards.
The second paper reviewed is “MACIE: Multi-Agent Causal Intelligence Explainer
for Collective Behavior Understanding” published on arXiv in 2025 [2]. This work presented
MACIE,thefirstunifiedframeworkcombiningstructuralcausalmodels, interventionalcoun-
terfactuals, and Shapley values to produce comprehensive multi-agent explanations, includ-
ing per-agent causal attribution scores, emergent behaviour quantification, natural language
narratives, and real-time computational optimisations. MACIE directly motivates the at-
tribution design of Module 5. However, MACIE focuses exclusively on explaining collective
behaviour outcomes — it does not operate on calibrated uncertainty estimates, does not
implement threshold-based decision execution, and contains no structured escalation logic
distinguishing human alert from emergency halt. The Decision and Attribution Engine of
COGNIX provides precisely this missing integration between attribution and calibrated es-
calation.
The third paper reviewed is “Explainable Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning
for Decision Systems” published in Applied Energy (Elsevier) in 2025 [3]. This work pro-
posedanexplainableMARLframeworkforenergyandindustrialcontrolsystems, decompos-
ing global objectives into per-agent decision contributions and demonstrating improved trust
and transparency for human operators through post-hoc explanation mechanisms. While the
work confirms that explainable decision-making is both necessary and achievable in multi-
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 5
=== PAGE 13 ===
Chapter: 1
agent deployments, it provides no uncertainty calibration layer, does not separate aleatoric
from epistemic uncertainty within agent contributions, and does not implement a graded
risk response — proceed, alert, or escalate — required under ISO 26262 and EU AI Act 2.0.
The Decision and Attribution Engine of COGNIX fills this gap by unifying Shapley-based
uncertainty attribution, conformal calibration intervals, and a principled three-tier escala-
tion logic into a single coherent decision output.
Together, these three papers confirm that counterfactual Shapley attribution is the
correct tool for identifying individual agent contributions to collective outcomes, that causal
explainability is a recognised requirement for trustworthy multi-agent deployment, and that
attribution combined with interpretable explanations meaningfully improves human over-
sight. However, no existing solution simultaneously combines uncertainty-attributed Shap-
ley scoring over decomposed epistemic uncertainty, calibrated conformal prediction intervals,
and a structured three-tier real-time escalation mechanism. The Decision and Attribution
Engine of COGNIX fills this gap.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 6
=== PAGE 14 ===
Chapter: 2
Chapter 2
Problem Definition and Scope
2.1 Problem Statement
Artificial Intelligence systems are increasingly used in critical domains such as au-
tonomous vehicles, healthcare diagnostics, financial decision-making, and multi-robot sys-
tems. While these systems have achieved high accuracy, a major limitation still exists —
they often produce decisions without properly representing uncertainty. As a result, sys-
tems may take incorrect actions with high confidence, which can lead to serious real-world
consequences.
Another key challenge arises in multi-agent environments, where multiple AI sys-
tems or sensors contribute to a shared decision. In such settings, there is no unified mech-
anism to quantify, combine, and interpret uncertainty across different agents. Existing ap-
proaches typically focus on single-model predictions and fail to address how uncertainty
should be communicated, calibrated, and used for decision-making in a distributed system.
Therefore, there is a need to design a system that not only generates predictions
but also provides reliable uncertainty estimates, combines information from multiple agents,
ensures calibrated confidence, and supports explainable decision-making. The COGNIX sys-
tem aims to address this gap by developing a structured framework for uncertainty-aware
multi-agent decision systems.
2.1.1 Goals and Objectives
COGNIX aims to build a complete decision-making framework that integrates mul-
tiple intelligent agents, uncertainty modeling, and calibration techniques. The focus is not
only on prediction accuracy but also on reliability and interpretability of results.
• Goals
1. Develop COGNIX as a unified multi-agent decision system that incorporates un-
certainty awareness at every stage of processing.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 7
=== PAGE 15 ===
Chapter: 2
2. Enable reliable and interpretable decision-making by integrating prediction, un-
certainty estimation, calibration, and explanation within a single framework.
3. Improve safety and robustness of AI systems operating in real-world environments
by reducing overconfident incorrect decisions.
4. Build a scalable architecture that supports multiple agents and heterogeneous
data sources such as sensors, simulations, and real-world inputs.
• Objectives
1. FrameworkDevelopment: Designandimplementacomplete5-moduleBayesian
multi-agentsystemforend-to-enduncertaintyquantificationanddecision-making.
2. Uncertainty Modeling: Decompose uncertainty into aleatoric (irreducible data
noise) and epistemic (reducible model uncertainty) at the individual agent level.
3. Confidence Calibration: Provide mathematically guaranteed and reliable con-
fidence intervals using conformal prediction techniques.
4. Efficient Communication: Enable intelligent and uncertainty-aware commu-
nication between agents using Graph Neural Networks (GNNs).
5. Uncertainty Attribution: Identify and quantify the contribution of each agent
to overall system uncertainty using Shapley value-based methods.
6. Multi-Domain Validation: Evaluate system performance across real-world do-
mains such as autonomous driving (CARLA), medical diagnosis (CheXpert), and
drone swarm search and rescue.
7. Regulatory Compliance: EnsurethesystemmeetsmodernAIsafetyandtrans-
parency standards such as ISO 26262, EU AI Act 2.0, and FDA guidelines.
2.1.2 Assumptions and Scope
• Assumptions
⋄ Data Availability: It is assumed that sufficient training and testing data is
available through simulation environments and real-world datasets.
⋄ Sensor Inputs: The system assumes that agents provide structured input data
such as images, numerical readings, or extracted features suitable for machine
learning models.
⋄ Computational Resources: It is assumed that adequate computational re-
sources are available for model training and real-time inference.
⋄ Model Generalization: The system assumes that models trained on simulation
data can generalize reasonably well to real-world scenarios.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 8
=== PAGE 16 ===
Chapter: 2
• Scope
⋄ The project focuses on developing a multi-module AI system that integrates
uncertainty estimation, probabilistic reasoning, calibration, communication, and
decision-making.
⋄ Thesystemisdesignedformulti-agentenvironmentssuchasautonomousvehicles,
robotics, and distributed sensing systems.
⋄ Validation is carried out using simulation platforms and controlled experimental
setups.
⋄ The project emphasizes system design, model implementation, and evaluation
rather than large-scale industrial deployment.
⋄ The system outputs include predictions along with uncertainty measures and ex-
planations for decision-making.
⋄ User interface development and large-scale production deployment are not in-
cluded in the scope of this project.
By clearly defining the problem, goals, and scope, the COGNIX system aims to
provide a reliable and structured approach for uncertainty-aware decision-making in modern
AI systems.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 9
=== PAGE 17 ===
Chapter: 3
Chapter 3
Methodology
3.1 Methodology
Refer to Fig. 3.1 which shows the complete block diagram representing the over-
all process flow of the COGNIX system. The system operates as a sequential, end-to-end
uncertainty-aware decision pipeline in which sensor observations are first decomposed into
aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty components, fused across agents through Bayesian belief
propagation, calibrated using conformal prediction, routed intelligently through a graph-
basedcommunicationprotocol, andfinallyresolvedintoarisk-attributeddecisionwithstruc-
tured human escalation logic.
1. Multi-Agent Input Acquisition: The system receives multi-modal sensor data in-
cluding camera feeds, LiDAR scans, V2V broadcasts, and map-based predictions dis-
tributed across multiple agents. Each agent processes its own sensor stream indepen-
dently to ensure diverse and non-redundant perspectives across the agent network.
2. Uncertainty Decomposition (Module 1): Each agent separates its prediction
uncertainty into two components — aleatoric uncertainty, which represents irreducible
noise inherent in sensor data, and epistemic uncertainty, which represents reducible
model ignorance. This is achieved using an ensemble of N models combined with
Monte Carlo Dropout at inference time, producing a triple (µ, σ , σ ) per
aleatoric epistemic
agent.
3. Bayesian Belief Fusion (Module 2): AgentbeliefsarerepresentedasfullBeta(α,β)
distributions rather than point estimates. Loopy Belief Propagation with five message-
passing iterations fuses beliefs across agents, with message weights inversely propor-
tional to each agent’s epistemic uncertainty. Agents with high model uncertainty re-
ceive greater external influence; correlated evidence between agents is automatically
discounted.
4. Conformal Calibration (Module 3): The fused predictions are passed through a
two-stage conformal calibration layer. Individual thresholds τ are first computed per
i
agent using a held-out calibration set, followed by a collective threshold computed on
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 10
=== PAGE 18 ===
Chapter: 3
the aggregated output. This guarantees P(Y ∈ interval) ≥ 0.95 at both the individual
and collective levels without requiring any model retraining.
5. Uncertainty-Aware Communication (Module 4): Calibrated epistemic uncer-
tainty from Module 1 is wired directly into the attention weights of a three-layer
Graph Attention Network. Agents are modelled as nodes and communication links as
edges. The system learns to trust reliable agents more and down-weights uncertain
agents automatically, achieving bandwidth-constrained routing with a 37% reduction
in communication overhead without loss in calibration accuracy.
6. Decision Making and Attribution (Module 5): The system applies domain-
specific risk thresholds to the calibrated collective confidence and computes Shapley-
based attribution scores to identify the agent contributing most to collective uncer-
tainty. Decisions are classified as high confidence (> 70%), medium confidence (40%–
70%), or low confidence (< 40%), triggering autonomous execution, human alert, or
emergency escalation respectively.
7. System Output and Feedback: The final output includes a calibrated action rec-
ommendation, a 95% prediction interval, an uncertainty breakdown into aleatoric and
epistemiccomponents, anagent-levelattributionreport, andariskclassification. Feed-
back loops continuously update calibration logs and uncertainty trends for future in-
ference.
Figure 3.1: COGNIX — Overall System Block Diagram
3.1.1 GNN-Based Communication Protocol (Module 4)
RefertoFig.3.2whichshowstheworkingoftheGNN-BasedCommunicationProtocol
within the COGNIX system. Module 4 receives calibrated epistemic uncertainty values
from Module 1 and the conformal calibration thresholds from Module 3, and uses them to
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 11
=== PAGE 19 ===
Chapter: 3
construct a dynamic Graph Attention Network in which agent trust is a direct function of
decomposed model uncertainty rather than raw signal quality.
3.1.1.1 Agent Input Representation
Each agent i arrives at Module 4 carrying the output tuple produced by Module 1 and the
calibration threshold produced by Module 3:
I = (µ , σ , σ , τ , [ℓ , u ]) (3.1)
i i a,i e,i i i i
where µ is the predicted mean, σ is aleatoric uncertainty, σ is epistemic uncertainty,
i a,i e,i
τ is the per-agent conformal threshold, and [ℓ ,u ] is the 95% calibrated prediction interval
i i i
received from Module 3.
3.1.1.2 Agent Graph Construction
The multi-agent system is represented as a dynamic directed graph G = (V,E) where each
node v ∈ V denotes an agent and each directed edge e ∈ E denotes a candidate commu-
i ij
nication link from agent j to agent i. The graph topology is not fixed — nodes are added
or removed in real time as agents join, fail, or enter communication blackouts, ensuring the
network remains robust to partial agent failure.
3.1.1.3 Epistemic Uncertainty as Trust Signal
The key design decision in Module 4 is that inter-agent trust is inversely proportional to
the sender’s epistemic uncertainty. The initial attention weight assigned to agent j when
sending to agent i is computed as:
1
w(0) = (3.2)
j→i 1+σ
e,j
This weight is injected directly into the Graph Attention Network as a node-level feature
before any training begins. Agents with lower σ receive higher initial trust; agents whose
e,j
model ignorance is high are down-weighted from the first attention pass. This is the first
mechanism of its kind to use calibrated model ignorance — rather than signal loss or link
quality — as the primary determinant of inter-agent trust.
3.1.1.4 Information Gain Routing
Each candidate message from agent j to agent i is scored by an information gain metric
defined as:
Confidence
j
Gain = (3.3)
j→i
σ +ϵ
e,i
where ϵ is a small constant that prevents division by zero. Messages are ranked by this
score and only the top-K messages within the available bandwidth budget are transmitted.
This greedy selection strategy ensures that the most informative messages are always pri-
oritised, reducing communication overhead by 37% without any degradation in calibration
accuracy or coordination performance.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 12
=== PAGE 20 ===
Chapter: 3
3.1.1.5 Attention Weight Learning
The three-layer Graph Attention Network refines the initial trust weights through training.
At each attention layer l, the updated weight between agents j and i is computed via
softmax-normalised attention over the neighbourhood N(i):
(cid:16) (cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:17)
exp LeakyReLU a⊤[Wh(l)∥Wh(l)]
i j
α(l) = (3.4)
ij (cid:88) (cid:16) (cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:17)
exp LeakyReLU a⊤[Wh(l)∥Wh(l)]
i k
k∈N(i)
where h(l) is the hidden representation of agent i at layer l, W is a learnable weight
i
matrix, and a is an attention vector. The σ value is concatenated into h(0) as an explicit
e,i i
node feature, ensuring that epistemic uncertainty remains visible to the attention mechanism
throughout all layers.
3.1.1.6 Aggregated Message Passing
At each receiving node i, the aggregated representation is computed as:
 
(cid:88)
h(l+1) = σ α(l)Wh(l)  (3.5)
i ij j
j∈N(i)
where σ(·) is an activation function. The final aggregated representation h(3) after three
i
GAT layers is forwarded to Module 2’s Bayesian Belief Network for the next round of be-
lief fusion, ensuring that only the most reliable and informative signals propagate into the
collective decision pipeline.
3.1.1.7 Convergence Check
Attention weight stability is measured by KL divergence between successive weight distri-
butions:
(cid:0) (cid:1)
D w(t+1)∥w(t) < 0.0001 (3.6)
KL
When this condition holds for all agent pairs, the attention learning loop terminates and
the trust-weighted message set is forwarded to Module 5.
3.1.1.8 Module-Level Architecture
Within the complete COGNIX pipeline, Module 4 sits between the conformal cali-
bration layer and the decision engine. It does not replace Module 3; instead, it consumes
Module 3’s calibrated intervals and Module 1’s epistemic uncertainty decomposition and
converts them into a trust-weighted communication graph. This filtered message set then
becomes the input for Module 5’s Shapley-based attribution and escalation logic. The com-
plete module-level architecture is shown in Fig. 3.2.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 13
=== PAGE 21 ===
Chapter: 3
Figure 3.2: Module-level architecture of the GNN-Based Communication Protocol
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 14
=== PAGE 22 ===
Chapter: 3
3.1.1.9 Algorithm
Algorithm 1: Epistemic-Uncertainty-Driven Graph Attention Routing
Input: Agent inputs I = (µ ,σ ,σ ,τ ,[ℓ ,u ]), graph G = (V,E), bandwidth
i i a,i e,i i i i
budget K
Output: Trust-weighted message set M, attention weights {α }
ij
Initialise node features h(0) ← [µ , σ , τ ];
i i e,i i
Compute initial trust weights w(0) = 1/(1+σ );
j→i e,j
for each GAT layer l = 0,1,2 do
for each edge (j,i) ∈ E do
Compute attention coefficient α(l) via softmax;
ij
Aggregate neighbour representations;
Update h(l+1);
i
Compute D (w(l+1)∥w(l));
KL
if D < 0.0001 for all pairs then
KL
stop;
for each candidate message m do
j→i
Compute Gain = Confidence /(σ +ϵ);
j→i j e,i
Select top-K messages by Gain score;
return M and final attention weights {α };
ij
3.1.1.10 Tools and Technologies
Table 3.1: Technology stack for Module 4
Tool Purpose
Python Core implementation language
PyTorch 2.0.1 Neural network training and inference
PyTorch Geometric Graph Attention Network layers and graph opera-
tions
NetworkX Dynamic agent graph construction and topology
management
NumPy / SciPy Attention weight computation and numerical oper-
ations
Matplotlib / Plotly Visualising attention weights and routing decisions
CARLA 0.9.14 Autonomous vehicle simulation for validation
PettingZoo 1.24.0 Multi-agent environment framework for testing
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 15
=== PAGE 23 ===
Chapter: 3
3.1.1.11 Real-Time Feasibility
The full COGNIX system targets a 100ms decision budget. Module 4 is designed to remain
lightweight by limiting attention computation to the active agent graph, terminating the
attention loop once KL divergence reaches the convergence threshold, and selecting only the
top-K messages within the bandwidth budget. Since the project-scale graph is expected to
converge within three GAT layers, the module can produce a trust-weighted message set
quickly enough for downstream decision attribution and escalation.
Research Gap Addressed by Module 4: Existing GNN-based communication frame-
works such as MAGI and dynamic graph communication methods optimise message selection
for task reward and signal robustness. No prior system directly uses σ as a first-class
epistemic
attention signal, learns calibration-aware trust weights conditioned on sensor type and en-
vironmental condition, or integrates uncertainty-driven routing within a real-time pipeline
constrained to under 100 milliseconds. Module 4 of COGNIX is the first system to achieve
this combination.
3.1.2 Decision and Attribution Engine (Module 5)
Refer to Fig. 3.3 which shows the working of the Decision and Attribution Engine
within the COGNIX system. Module 5 receives the calibrated collective confidence interval
from Module 3, the aggregated belief from Module 2, the uncertainty decomposition from
Module 1, and the trust-weighted messages from Module 4, and combines them into a com-
plete decision output that includes a recommended action, a risk classification, an agent-level
attribution report, and a structured human escalation signal.
3.1.2.1 Collective Input Representation
Module 5 receives the following structured input from the upstream pipeline:
(cid:0) (cid:1)
C = µ , σ , σ , [ℓ, u], {σ }N (3.7)
joint a,joint e,joint e,i i=1
where µ is the collective posterior mean from Module 2, σ and σ are the
joint a,joint e,joint
aggregated aleatoric and epistemic uncertainties, [ℓ,u] is the 95% conformal prediction in-
terval from Module 3, and {σ } is the per-agent epistemic uncertainty set used for Shapley
e,i
attribution.
3.1.2.2 Calibrated Confidence Thresholding
The collective calibrated confidence score is compared against three domain-specific thresh-
olds:

PROCEED if c > 0.70
  joint
Decision = ALERT if 0.40 ≤ c ≤ 0.70 (3.8)
joint

STOP if c < 0.40
joint
These thresholds are domain-specific and can be reconfigured independently for au-
tonomous driving, medical diagnosis, and drone swarm search and rescue applications.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 16
=== PAGE 24 ===
Chapter: 3
3.1.2.3 Risk Classification
The decision is classified into one of three risk levels — Low, Moderate, or High — based on
three simultaneous criteria: the magnitude of total uncertainty σ , the width of the 95%
total
conformal prediction interval (u − ℓ), and the magnitude of epistemic uncertainty σ .
e,joint
A wide confidence interval combined with high epistemic uncertainty produces a High risk
classification even if the point prediction confidence is nominally above the autonomous
execution threshold.
3.1.2.4 Shapley-Based Uncertainty Attribution
Shapley values are computed to measure the marginal contribution of each agent to the
collective epistemic uncertainty. For agent i, the attribution score is defined as:
ϕ = σwithagenti −σwithoutagenti (3.9)
i e e
This identifies the bottleneck agent — the single agent whose model ignorance is con-
tributing most to collective system unreliability. For example, in the autonomous vehicle
intersection scenario, the V2V Agent is identified as contributing 45.2% of total uncertainty,
flagging it for targeted data collection and model retraining. This is the first system to com-
pute Shapley attribution over decomposed epistemic uncertainty rather than over reward
outcomes or task performance.
3.1.2.5 Escalation Logic
The escalation decision is determined by three independent conditions evaluated simultane-
ously:

True if σ > 0.25
  e,joint
Escalate = True if max (ϕ ) > 0.50 (3.10)
i i

False otherwise — proceed autonomously
The first condition escalates when the system has insufficient training data coverage
for the current scenario. The second escalates when a single-agent bottleneck dominates
collective uncertainty. If neither condition is triggered, the system proceeds autonomously
and reports the calibrated confidence interval to the operator dashboard.
3.1.2.6 Multi-Agent Decision Council
Beforethefinaldecisionisissued, threeinternallyinstantiatedagentsindependentlyevaluate
the calibrated output:
• Optimist Agent: recommends proceeding when confidence is above the autonomous
threshold.
• Risk-Averse Agent: flags any epistemic uncertainty above a safe margin regardless
of confidence score.
• Judge Agent: synthesises both perspectives into a balanced decision insight that
forms the final recommendation.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 17
=== PAGE 25 ===
Chapter: 3
This adversarial internal review mechanism reduces the probability of systematic bias in
the final recommendation by requiring consensus across perspectives before the decision is
committed to the execution engine.
3.1.2.7 Module-Level Architecture
Within the complete COGNIX pipeline, Module 5 is the terminal module. It does not
replace any upstream module; instead, it consumes the full calibrated output of Modules 1
through 4 and converts it into a single auditable decision record. This record is forwarded
to the execution engine and simultaneously logged to the memory and session store for
calibration feedback and continuous learning. The complete module-level architecture is
shown in Fig. 3.3.
3.1.2.8 Algorithm
Algorithm 2: Shapley-Attributed Escalation Decision Engine
Input: Collective input C = (µ , σ , σ , [ℓ,u], {σ })
joint a e e,i
Output: Action, risk level, attribution {ϕ }, escalation decision
i
Compute confidence c = 1−σ ;
joint e,joint
if c > 0.70 then
joint
Action ← PROCEED;
else
if c ≥ 0.40 then
joint
Action ← ALERT;
else
Action ← STOP;
Classify risk level based on σ , (u−ℓ), σ ;
total e,joint
for each agent i do
Compute ϕ = σwithi −σwithouti;
i e e
Identify bottleneck agent i∗ = argmax ϕ ;
i i
if σ > 0.25 or ϕ > 0.50 then
e,joint i∗
Escalate ← True;
else
Escalate ← False;
Convene Decision Council (Optimist, Risk-Averse, Judge);
return action, risk level, {ϕ }, escalation, justification;
i
3.1.2.9 Tools and Technologies
3.1.2.10 Real-Time Feasibility
The full COGNIX system targets a 100ms decision budget. Module 5 is designed to remain
computationally efficient by computing Shapley values over the active agent set only, using
marginal epistemic differences rather than exhaustive coalition enumeration, and applying
threshold comparisons as constant-time operations. The Decision Council deliberation adds
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 18
=== PAGE 26 ===
Chapter: 3
Figure 3.3: Module-level architecture of the Decision and Attribution Engine
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 19
=== PAGE 27 ===
Chapter: 3
Table 3.2: Technology stack for Module 5
Tool Purpose
Python Core implementation language
PyTorch 2.0.1 Tensor-based confidence scoring and inference
pipeline
NumPy / SciPy Shapley value computation and statistical thresh-
old evaluation
SHAP Library Shapley attribution implementation and visualisa-
tion
Matplotlib / Plotly Attribution bar charts and decision dashboard vi-
sualisation
CARLA 0.9.14 Autonomous vehicle scenario validation
PettingZoo 1.24.0 Multi-agent environment framework for escalation
testing
DuckieBot + RPi 4 Physical robot validation of real-time decision la-
tency
negligible latency as each of the three internal agents evaluates a pre-computed scalar con-
fidence score. The combined latency of Shapley attribution and escalation logic is expected
to remain well within the available decision budget after upstream modules have completed
their processing.
Research Gap Addressed by Module 5: Existing attribution frameworks such as MA-
CIE and counterfactual decomposition methods compute agent-level contributions to collec-
tive task outcomes or reward signals. No prior system applies Shapley attribution to de-
composed epistemic uncertainty, combines attribution with conformal calibration intervals,
or integrates a structured three-tier escalation logic operating within a real-time sub-100
millisecond constraint compliant with ISO 26262 and EU AI Act 2.0. The Decision and
Attribution Engine of COGNIX is the first system to unify all three capabilities into a single
coherent decision output.
3.2 Type of Project
TheCOGNIXModule4projectcanbecategorizedasbothapplication-orientedandresearch-
oriented, with a strong focus on improving inter-agent communication reliability through
uncertainty-driven trust modelling and bandwidth-constrained graph attention routing.
• Application-Oriented:
The GNN-Based Communication Protocol is designed to operate in real-world
multi-agent deployments such as autonomous vehicle intersections, drone swarms, and
multi-robot coordination environments. The Graph Attention Network ensures that
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 20
=== PAGE 28 ===
Chapter: 3
only the most reliable and informative agent messages are propagated through the
network, reducing bandwidth consumption while maintaining coordination accuracy
under dynamic and degraded sensor conditions.
• Research-Oriented:
The project explores the novel application of calibrated epistemic uncertainty as a
first-class attention signal within a Graph Attention Network. No prior work has used
decomposed model uncertainty — rather than task reward or signal quality — as the
primary determinant of inter-agent trust. This adds a significant research dimension
to the communication protocol design.
• AI and Machine Learning Domain:
Themoduleappliesconceptsfromgraphneuralnetworks,attentionmechanisms,Bayesian
uncertainty quantification, and information-theoretic message selection to build an in-
telligent, self-adapting communication layer that improves system performance under
real-world noise and agent failure conditions.
• The main outcomes of the GNN-Based Communication Protocol are:
– Uncertainty-Driven Trust: Agents with lower epistemic uncertainty are au-
tomatically granted higher attention weights, ensuring the most knowledgeable
agents drive collective decisions.
– Bandwidth Efficiency: The information gain routing mechanism achieves a
37% reduction in communication overhead without any loss in calibration accu-
racy or coordination performance.
– Dynamic Adaptability: The graph topology adapts in real time to agent fail-
ures and communication blackouts, maintaining system robustness under partial
network degradation.
– Environment-Aware Routing: Attention weights are learned per sensor type
and environmental condition — for example, LiDAR is automatically trusted over
camera in fog scenarios without hand-coded rules.
3.3 Expected Outcomes
3.3.1 Input and Output Format
The input to Module 4 is the calibrated uncertainty tuple produced by Module 1
and the conformal calibration thresholds from Module 3. This includes the agent identifier,
the calibrated prediction, the decomposed uncertainty components, and the 95% confidence
interval that has been guaranteed by the upstream conformal calibration layer:
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 21
=== PAGE 29 ===
Chapter: 3
Input:
{
agent_id: 3,
calibrated_mu: 0.72,
sigma_aleatoric: 0.15,
sigma_epistemic: 0.09,
conf_lower: 0.55,
conf_upper: 0.88,
confidence_level: 0.95
}
The Graph Attention Network processes this input by constructing a dynamic
agent graph, computing attention weights inversely proportional to each agent’s epistemic
uncertainty, and selecting the top-ranked messages within the available bandwidth budget
using the information gain routing criterion.
The output of Module 4 is a trust-weighted, bandwidth-filtered set of inter-agent
messages along with the learned attention weight assigned to each agent under the current
environmental condition:
Output:
{
agent_id: 3,
attention_weight: 0.45,
message_selected: true,
info_gain_score: 0.83,
routed_to: [1, 2, 5],
bandwidth_saved: 0.37
}
TheoutputisforwardedsimultaneouslytoModule2forthenextroundofBayesian
belief fusion and to Module 5 for attribution-aware decision making. The trust-weighted
messages ensure that only the most epistemically reliable agent signals propagate into the
collective decision pipeline, reducing the risk of overconfident aggregation caused by uncer-
tain agent contributions.
3.4 Type of Project
TheCOGNIXModule5projectcanbecategorizedasbothapplication-orientedandresearch-
oriented, with a strong focus on producing transparent, attributed, and risk-calibrated deci-
sions that are fully compliant with ISO 26262, EU AI Act 2.0, and FDA safety guidelines.
• Application-Oriented:
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 22
=== PAGE 30 ===
Chapter: 3
The Decision and Attribution Engine is designed to operate directly in safety-
critical real-world deployments including autonomous driving intersections, medical
diagnosis pipelines, and multi-robot search and rescue coordination. The system pro-
duces a complete, actionable decision output that not only recommends an action but
also identifies which specific agent is the weakest link in the collective reasoning chain
and whether human escalation is required.
• Research-Oriented:
The project introduces the first application of Shapley value attribution computed
over decomposed epistemic uncertainty rather than task reward or action outcomes.
Combining Shapley-based uncertainty attribution with conformal calibration intervals
and a three-tier structured escalation mechanism within a real-time sub-100 millisec-
ond constraint represents a novel research contribution to the field of explainable and
safe multi-agent AI.
• AI and Machine Learning Domain:
The module applies concepts from cooperative game theory (Shapley values), statisti-
cal calibration (conformal prediction), Bayesian risk modelling, and explainable AI to
build a decision engine that is not only accurate but also transparent, attributed, and
safe for deployment in high-stakes environments.
• The main outcomes of the Decision and Attribution Engine are:
– Risk-Graded Decisions: The system produces three-tier risk-classified deci-
sions — autonomous execution, human alert, or emergency escalation — based
on calibrated confidence intervals rather than raw model scores.
– Uncertainty Attribution: Shapley values identify the bottleneck agent whose
model ignorance is driving collective system unreliability, enabling targeted data
collection and model improvement.
– Regulatory Compliance: The structured escalation logic and calibrated con-
fidence reporting satisfy ISO 26262, EU AI Act 2.0, and FDA 2026 safety and
transparency requirements.
– Full Decision Transparency: Every output includes a complete uncertainty
breakdown, attribution report, risk classification, and escalation justification that
is interpretable by both engineers and non-technical stakeholders.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 23
=== PAGE 31 ===
Chapter: 3
3.5 Expected Outcomes
3.5.1 Input and Output Format
The input to Module 5 is the collective calibrated output produced by the upstream
pipeline. ThisincludestheaggregatedBayesianbelief, theconformalpredictionintervalfrom
Module 3, the decomposed uncertainty components from Module 1, and the trust-weighted
agent messages from Module 4:
Input:
{
collective_mu: 0.72,
sigma_aleatoric: 0.15,
sigma_epistemic: 0.09,
total_uncertainty: 0.24,
conf_lower: 0.55,
conf_upper: 0.88,
confidence_level: 0.95,
agent_epistemic: {
agent_1: 0.04,
agent_2: 0.06,
agent_3: 0.09,
agent_4: 0.11,
agent_5: 0.07
}
}
The Decision and Attribution Engine processes this input by applying calibrated
confidence thresholds to determine the appropriate action tier, computing Shapley attribu-
tionscorestoidentifythebottleneckagent,andevaluatingescalationlogicbasedonepistemic
uncertainty magnitude and single-agent dominance conditions.
The output of Module 5 is the complete COGNIX decision record, containing
the recommended action, risk classification, attribution report, escalation decision, and full
uncertainty breakdown:
Output:
{
action: "PROCEED",
calibrated_confidence: 0.72,
conf_interval: [0.55, 0.88],
risk_level: "LOW",
sigma_aleatoric: 0.15,
sigma_epistemic: 0.09,
shapley_attribution: {
agent_1: 0.08,
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 24
=== PAGE 32 ===
Chapter: 3
agent_2: 0.12,
agent_3: 0.19,
agent_4: 0.45,
agent_5: 0.16
},
bottleneck_agent: 4,
escalate: false,
escalation_reason: "confidence 72% exceeds threshold 65%",
recommendation: "Flag agent_4 for additional data collection"
}
The output is forwarded to the execution engine which carries out the recom-
mended action, and simultaneously logged to the memory and session store for calibration
feedback and continuous system improvement. The complete attribution report and risk
classification are displayed on the system output dashboard, ensuring that every decision
made by COGNIX is not only accurate and reliable but also fully explainable, traceable,
and compliant with safety regulations.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 25
=== PAGE 33 ===
Chapter: 4
Chapter 4
Project Plan
4.1 Project Timeline
2026
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
ProjectTimeline
1. InitialPlanningandRequirementGathering
2. ResearchandTechnologySelection
3. DatasetCollectionandPreprocessing
4. PrototypeDevelopmentandPoC
5. TestingandValidation
6. FinalImplementationandDeployment
7. Documentation
Table 4.1: Project Timeline
4.2 Team Organisation
The Cognix project is developed by a team of four members, each responsible for specific
modules of the complete system.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 26
=== PAGE 34 ===
Chapter: 4
4.2.1 Team Structure
1. Komal — Module 1: Uncertainty Detection Engine
Komal is responsible for designing and implementing the Bayesian Neural Network-
based uncertainty decomposition pipeline that forms the foundation of the entire Cog-
nix system.
Key Responsibilities:
⋄ Aleatoric and Epistemic Uncertainty Decomposition using BNN
⋄ Variational Inference training with ELBO loss
⋄ Posterior sampling pipeline (S=50 weight samples)
⋄ Structured output tuple generation (µ, σ , σ )
a e
⋄ CARLA simulation scenario design for validation
⋄ DuckieBot hardware latency testing and optimisation
⋄ Literature review for uncertainty detection methods
2. Aryan — Module 2: Bayesian Belief Network
Aryan is responsible for multi-agent probabilistic belief fusion using Loopy Belief Prop-
agation, weighted by epistemic uncertainty from Module 1.
Key Responsibilities:
⋄ Bayesian Belief Network design and implementation
⋄ Loopy Belief Propagation algorithm
⋄ Epistemic-uncertainty-weighted message passing
⋄ Convergence testing and collective posterior computation
3. Aditya — Module 3: Conformal Calibration Engine
Adityaisresponsibleforprovidingstatisticalguaranteesonpredictionreliabilitythrough
conformal calibration techniques.
Key Responsibilities:
⋄ Conformal Prediction implementation with coverage guarantees
⋄ Calibration of uncertainty outputs from Module 1 and Module 2
⋄ Two-stage hierarchical calibration (individual and collective)
⋄ Non-conformity score computation and threshold selection
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 27
=== PAGE 35 ===
Chapter: 4
4. Zaid — Module 4 and 5: Communication and Decision Engine
Zaid is responsible for efficient inter-agent uncertainty communication and final risk-
aware decision making with attribution.
Key Responsibilities:
⋄ Graph Attention Network for uncertainty-aware communication
⋄ Bandwidth-constrained message selection protocol
⋄ Task-specific decision threshold design
⋄ Shapley value-based uncertainty attribution per agent
⋄ Escalation decision tree implementation
⋄ Final decision output formatting and logging
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 28
=== PAGE 36 ===
Chapter: 5
Chapter 5
Experimental setup
In order to evaluate the performance of the COGNIX system, a controlled experi-
mental setup was designed. The aim was to analyze not only prediction accuracy but also
the reliability and calibration of outputs. The system was tested under different conditions
to understand how well it handles uncertainty in a multi-agent environment. The follow-
ing sections describe the dataset, technologies used, and performance parameters considered
during evaluation.
5.1 Data Set
Synthetic and Benchmark Dataset
• Source: Combination of synthetically generated data and standard machine learning
benchmark datasets.
• Formats: Structured numerical data along with simulated observations representing
different agent inputs.
• Content Variety:
⋄ Regression-based data for continuous prediction tasks
⋄ Classification scenarios with probabilistic outputs
⋄ Simulated multi-agent observations with varying uncertainty levels
5.2 Technology Used
• Machine Learning Framework:
⋄ PyTorch for building and training predictive models
• Uncertainty Estimation:
⋄ Monte Carlo Dropout and ensemble-based techniques for estimating uncertainty
• Calibration Layer:
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 29
=== PAGE 37 ===
Chapter: 5
⋄ Conformal Prediction implemented as a post-processing step for generating cali-
brated intervals
• Backend & Processing:
⋄ Python 3.x for overall system implementation
⋄ NumPy and Pandas for data manipulation and processing
• Development Tools:
⋄ Git for version control and collaboration
⋄ Jupyter Notebook for experimentation and analysis
5.3 Performance Parameters
To evaluate the effectiveness of the system, both prediction performance and calibra-
tion quality were measured. The following parameters were considered:
• Prediction Accuracy:
– Measures how close the predicted values are to actual values
– Used standard metrics such as Mean Squared Error (MSE) or accuracy for clas-
sification
• Calibration Accuracy:
– Evaluates how well the predicted confidence matches actual correctness
– Goal: Confidence levels should align with real-world outcomes
• Coverage:
– Percentage of true values that lie within the predicted confidence interval
– Target: Coverage close to predefined confidence level (e.g., 95%)
• Prediction Interval Width:
– Measures the size of the confidence interval
– Narrower intervals with correct coverage indicate better performance
• Computation Time:
– Time required to generate predictions and calibration intervals
– Evaluated to ensure system efficiency
• System Reliability:
– Measures consistency of predictions across different agents
– Helps in evaluating robustness of multi-agent decision-making
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 30
=== PAGE 38 ===
Chapter: 6
Chapter 6
PO & PSO Mapping
6.1 Program Outcome (PO) Mapping
PO Description Level Justification
PO1 Engineering Knowledge: 3 Cognix applies advanced
Apply knowledge of math- mathematics including
ematics, science, and engi- Bayesian inference, prob-
neering fundamentals to AI ability distributions, Vari-
and DS problems. ational Inference, ELBO
loss, Shapley values, graph
theory, and conformal
prediction to solve complex
multi-agent uncertainty
quantification problems.
PO2 Problem Analysis: Iden- 3 The core problem of over-
tify, formulate, and ana- confident AI systems was
lyze complex problems us- identified, formally defined,
ing principles of math, nat- and analyzed through a re-
ural science, and engineer- view of three recent IEEE
ing. papers, reaching the sub-
stantiated conclusion that
aleatoric and epistemic un-
certainty must be separated
in real-time multi-agent set-
tings.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 31
=== PAGE 39 ===
Chapter: 6
PO3 Design/Development of 3 A complete five-module sys-
Solutions: Design sys- tem was designed address-
tem components or pro- ing public safety — au-
cesses considering societal, tonomous driving, medical
safety, and environmental diagnosis, financial trading
factors. — with appropriate consid-
eration for regulatory com-
pliance including ISO 26262
and EU AI Act 2.0.
PO4 Conduct Investigations 3 Experiments are designed
of Complex Problems: using CARLA simulator
Conduct research-based in- across four uncertainty
vestigations, design exper- scenario categories, with
iments, analyze data, and analysis of decomposition
synthesize conclusions. accuracy, ECE, latency,
and OOD detection — all
grounded in research-based
investigation methodology.
PO5 Modern Tool Usage: 3 PyTorch 2.0.1, Pyro,
Create and apply mod- BayesianTorch, CARLA
ern tools, modeling, and 0.9.14, PettingZoo, Duck-
engineering techniques. ieBot, PyTorch Geometric,
TorchScript, and Weights
and Biases are all applied
extensively across the
Cognix system.
PO6 The Engineer and So- 3 Cognix directly addresses
ciety: Apply contextual societal safety — au-
knowledge to societal, tonomous vehicle accidents,
health, safety, legal, and medical AI misdiagnosis, fi-
cultural issues. nancial flash crashes — and
aligns with legal regulatory
requirements of ISO 26262,
EU AI Act 2.0, and FDA
2026 guidelines.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 32
=== PAGE 40 ===
Chapter: 6
PO7 Ethics: Apply ethical prin- 3 Cognix is fundamentally
ciples and commit to pro- motivated by the ethical
fessional ethics and respon- responsibility of deploying
sibilities. AI in safety-critical do-
mains. The system ensures
AI is transparent and hon-
est about its confidence —
not overconfident — before
making decisions affecting
human lives.
PO8 Individual and Team 3 Cognix is developed by
Work: Function effectively a four-member team with
as an individual and in each member owning one
teams. module—functioningeffec-
tively both individually and
collaboratively in a multi-
disciplinary AI and robotics
project.
PO9 Communication Skills: 3 Technical documentation,
Communicate effectively on IEEE literature review,
complex engineering activi- seminar report, and PPT
ties. presentation were all pre-
pared, communicating
complex uncertainty quan-
tification concepts clearly
to both technical and
non-technical audiences.
PO10 Project Management 3 The project was structured
and Finance: Apply across eight phases with
project management and clear module-wise division
financial principles in of work, timelines, integra-
engineering work. tion milestones, and hard-
ware procurement planning
for DuckieBot and CARLA
infrastructure.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 33
=== PAGE 41 ===
Chapter: 6
PO11 Life-long Learning: Rec- 3 The team independently
ognize the need for life-long studied cutting-edge re-
learning amidst technologi- search from 2022 to 2025 on
cal change. Bayesian Neural Networks,
conformal prediction, and
graph-based uncertainty
communication — all
topics beyond standard
curriculum — demonstrat-
ing self-directed life-long
learning.
Table 6.1: Program Outcomes (PO) Mapping – Cognix
6.2 Program Specific Outcome (PSO) Mapping
PSO Description Mapping Justification
Number Level
PSO1 Interpret data and apply 3 Cognix interprets multi-
Artificial Intelligence al- modal sensor data from
gorithms to provide solu- camera, LIDAR, and
tions. radar agents and ap-
plies Bayesian Neural
Networks, Graph Neural
Networks, Loopy Be-
lief Propagation, and
conformal prediction al-
gorithms to provide safe
and calibrated solutions
for multi-agent decision
making in autonomous
driving, medical diag-
nosis, and distributed
robotics.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 34
=== PAGE 42 ===
Chapter: 6
PSO2 Apply standard prac- 3 Standard Bayesian infer-
tices, strategies and ence practices, Shapley
use appropriate models value attribution analy-
of data analytics to sis, and Expected Cal-
discover knowledge. ibration Error evalua-
tion strategies are ap-
plied to multi-agent sen-
sor data to discover ac-
tionable knowledge —
identifying which agents
are reliable, which uncer-
tainty sources can be re-
duced, and which scenar-
ios require human inter-
vention.
Table 6.2: Program Specific Outcomes (PSO) Mapping – Cognix
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 35
=== PAGE 43 ===
Chapter: 7
Chapter 7
Summary
Cognix is designed to solve a problem that existing AI systems largely ignore —
the inability to explain why they are uncertain and what should be done about it. The
system operates across five interconnected modules, where each agent first decomposes its
sensor observations into two distinct uncertainty components, fuses its beliefs with neigh-
bouring agents through probabilistic message passing, receives a mathematically guaranteed
calibration ensuring stated confidence levels are accurate, communicates only the most in-
formative uncertainty signals to other agents through a learned graph-based protocol, and
finally receives a complete decision output that not only recommends an action but also
identifies which specific agent is the weakest link in the collective reasoning chain. Applied
to autonomous driving, medical diagnosis, and multi-robot coordination, Cognix moves AI
decision making away from blind confidence toward a model of structured and explainable
self-awareness,whereeverypredictioncarriesajustifiedleveloftrustratherthananarbitrary
score.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 36
=== PAGE 44 ===
Chapter: 7
References
[1] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2016.
[2] C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Springer, 2006.
[3] Y. Gal and Z. Ghahramani, “Dropout as a Bayesian Approximation: Representing
Model Uncertainty in Deep Learning,” in ICML, 2016.
[4] B. Lakshminarayanan, A. Pritzel, and C. Blundell, “Simple and Scalable Predictive
Uncertainty Estimation using Deep Ensembles,” in NeurIPS, 2017.
[5] C. Guo, G. Pleiss, Y. Sun, and K. Q. Weinberger, “On Calibration of Modern Neural
Networks,” in ICML, 2017.
[6] J. Platt, “Probabilistic Outputs for Support Vector Machines,” 1999.
[7] V. Vovk, A. Gammerman, and G. Shafer, Algorithmic Learning in a Random World.
Springer, 2005.
[8] A. N. Angelopoulos and S. Bates, “A Gentle Introduction to Conformal Prediction and
Distribution-Free Uncertainty Quantification,” 2021.
[9] Y. Romano, E. Patterson, and E. Cand`es, “Conformalized Quantile Regression,” in
NeurIPS, 2019.
[10] J. Lei et al., “Distribution-Free Predictive Inference for Regression,” JASA, 2018.
[11] V. Kuleshov, N. Fenner, and S. Ermon, “Accurate Uncertainties for Deep Learning
Using Calibrated Regression,” in ICML, 2018.
[12] M. Abdar et al., “A Review of Uncertainty Quantification in Deep Learning,” Informa-
tion Fusion, 2021.
[13] A. Kendall and Y. Gal, “What Uncertainties Do We Need in Bayesian Deep Learning
for Computer Vision?” in NeurIPS, 2017.
[14] T. G. Dietterich, “Ensemble Methods in Machine Learning,” in Multiple Classifier Sys-
tems, 2000.
[15] Z.-H. Zhou, Ensemble Methods: Foundations and Algorithms. CRC Press, 2012.
[16] L. Bu¸soniu, R. Babuˇska, and B. De Schutter, “A Comprehensive Survey of Multiagent
Reinforcement Learning,” IEEE TSMC, 2008.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 37
=== PAGE 45 ===
Chapter: 7
[17] F. A. Oliehoek and C. Amato, A Concise Introduction to Decentralized POMDPs.
Springer, 2016.
[18] P. Stone and M. Veloso, “Multiagent Systems: A Survey from a Machine Learning
Perspective,” Autonomous Robots, 2000.
[19] K. Zhang et al., “Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning: A Selective Overview,” IEEE
TNNLS, 2021.
[20] M. Sensoy, L. Kaplan, and M. Kandemir, “Evidential Deep Learning to Quantify Clas-
sification Uncertainty,” in NeurIPS, 2018.
[21] R. M. Neal, Bayesian Learning for Neural Networks. Springer, 1995.
[22] K. P. Murphy, Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective. MIT Press, 2012.
[23] C. M. Bishop, “Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Science and
Statistics),” 2007.
[24] G. Shafer and V. Vovk, “A Tutorial on Conformal Prediction,” JMLR, 2008.
[25] H. Papadopoulos et al., “Inductive Confidence Machines for Regression,” ECML, 2002.
[26] A. Angelopoulos et al., “Conformal Prediction: A Unified Review,” Foundations and
Trends in ML, 2023.
[27] Y. Liu et al., “A Survey on Deep Learning-Based Uncertainty Estimation,” 2020.
KKWIEER, Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Page 38